My route, after parting from Lord Westport at Birmingham, lay, as I
have mentioned in the "Autobiographic Sketches," through Stamford to
Laxton, the Northamptonshire seat of Lord Carbery. From Stamford, which
I had reached by some intolerable old coach, such as in those days too
commonly abused the patience and long-suffering of Young England, I
took a post-chaise to Laxton. The distance was but nine miles, and the
postilion drove well, so that I could not really have been long upon
the road; and yet, from gloomy rumination upon the unhappy destination
which I believed myself approaching within three or four months, never
had I weathered a journey that seemed to me so long and dreary. As I
alighted on the steps at Laxton, the first dinner-bell rang; and I was
hurrying to my toilet, when my sister Mary, who had met me in the
portico, begged me first of all to come into Lady Carbery's
dressing-room, her ladyship having something special to communicate,
which related (as I understood her) to one Simon. "What Simon? Simon
Peter?"--O, no, you irreverend boy, no Simon at all with an S, but
Cymon with a C,--Dryden's Cymon,--

  "That whistled as he went for want of thought.'"

This one indication was a key to the whole explanation that followed.
The sole visitors, it seemed, at that time to Laxton, beside my sister
and myself, were Lord and Lady Massey. They were understood to be
domesticated at Laxton for a very long stay. In reality, my own private
construction of the case (though unauthorized by anything ever hinted
to me by Lady Carbery) was, that Lord Massey might probably be under
some cloud of pecuniary embarrassments, such as suggested prudentially
an absence from Ireland. Meantime, what was it that made him an object
of peculiar interest to Lady Carbery? It was the singular revolution
which, in one whom all his friends looked upon as sold to
constitutional torpor, suddenly, and beyond all hope, had kindled a new
and nobler life. Occupied originally by no shadow of any earthly
interest, killed by _ennui_, all at once Lord Massey had fallen
passionately in love with a fair young countrywoman, well connected,
but bringing him no fortune (I report only from hearsay), and endowing
him simply with the priceless blessing of her own womanly charms, her
delightful society, and her sweet, Irish style of innocent gayety. No
transformation that ever legends or romances had reported was more
memorable. Lapse of time (for Lord Massey had now been married three or
four years), and deep seclusion from general society, had done nothing,
apparently, to lower the tone of his happiness. The expression of this
happiness was noiseless and unobtrusive; no marks were there of vulgar
uxoriousness--nothing that could provoke the sneer of the worldling;
but not the less so entirely had the society of his young wife created
a new principle of life within him, and evoked some nature hitherto
slumbering, and which, no doubt, would else have continued to slumber
till his death, that, at moments when he believed himself unobserved,
he still wore the aspect of an impassioned lover.

For never did the drawing-room door open, and suddenly disclose the
beautiful figure of Lady Massey, than a mighty cloud seemed to roll
away from the young Irishman's brow. At this time it happened, and
indeed it often happened, that Lord Carbery was absent in Ireland. It
was probable, therefore, that during the long couple of hours through
which the custom of those times bound a man to the dinner-table after
the disappearance of the ladies, his time would hang heavily on his
hands. To me, therefore, Lady Carbery looked, having first put me in
possession of the case, for assistance to her hospitality, under the
difficulties I have stated. She thoroughly loved Lady Massey, as,
indeed, nobody could help doing; and for _her_ sake, had there
been no separate interest surrounding the young lord, it would have
been most painful to her that through Lord Carbery's absence a periodic
tedium should oppress her guest at that precise season of the day which
traditionally dedicated itself to genial enjoyment. Glad, therefore,
was she that an ally had come at last to Laxton, who might arm her
purposes of hospitality with some powers of self-fulfilment. And yet,
for a service of that nature, could she reasonably rely upon me? Odious
is the hobble-de-hoy to the mature young man. Generally speaking, that
cannot be denied. But in me, though naturally the shyest of human
beings, intense commerce with men of every rank, from the highest to
the lowest, had availed to dissipate all arrears of _mauvaise
honte_; I could talk upon innumerable subjects; and, as the readiest
means of entering immediately upon business, I was fresh from Ireland,
knew multitudes of those whom Lord Massey either knew or felt an
interest in, and, at that happy period of life, found it easy, with
three or four glasses of wine, to call back the golden spirits which
were now so often deserting me. Renovated, meantime, by a hot bath, I
was ready at the second summons of the dinner-bell, and descended a new
creature to the drawing-room. Here I was presented to the noble lord
and his wife. Lord Massey was in figure shortish, but broad and stout,
and wore an amiable expression of face. That I could execute Lady
Carbery's commission, I felt satisfied at once. And, accordingly, when
the ladies had retired from the dining-room, I found an easy opening,
in various circumstances connected with the Laxton stables, for
introducing naturally a picturesque and contrasting sketch of the stud
and the stables at Westport. The stables and everything connected with
the stables at Laxton were magnificent; in fact, far out of symmetry
with the house, which, at that time, was elegant and comfortable, but
not splendid. As usual in English establishments, all the appointments
were complete, and carried to the same point of exquisite finish. The
stud of hunters was first-rate and extensive; and the whole scene, at
closing the stables for the night, was so splendidly arranged and
illuminated, that Lady Carbery would take all her visitors once or
twice a week to admire it. On the other hand, at Westport you might
fancy yourself overlooking the establishment of some Albanian Pacha.
Crowds of irregular helpers and grooms, many of them totally
unrecognized by Lord Altamont, some half countenanced by this or that
upper servant, some doubtfully tolerated, some _not_ tolerated,
but nevertheless slipping in by postern doors when the enemy had
withdrawn, made up a strange mob as regarded the human element in this
establishment. And Dean Browne regularly asserted that five out of six
amongst these helpers he himself could swear to as active boys from
Vinegar Hill. Trivial enough, meantime, in our eyes, was any little
matter of rebellion that they might have upon their consciences. High
treason we willingly winked at. But what we could _not_ wink at
was the systematic treason which they committed against our comfort,
namely, by teaching our horses all imaginable tricks, and training them
up in the way along which they should _not_ go, so that when they
were old they were very little likely to depart from it. Such a set of
restive, hard-mouthed wretches as Lord Westport and I daily had to
bestride, no tongue could describe. There was a cousin of Lord
Westport's, subsequently created Lord Oranmore, distinguished for his
horsemanship, and always splendidly mounted from his father's stables
at Castle M'Garret, to whom our stormy contests with ruined tempers and
vicious habits yielded a regular comedy of fun; and, in order to
improve it, he would sometimes bribe Lord Westport's treacherous groom
into misleading us, when floundering amongst bogs, into the interior
labyrinths of these morasses. Deep, however, as the morass, was this
man's remorse when, on leaving Westport, I gave him the heavy golden
perquisite, which my mother (unaware of the tricks he had practised
upon me) had by letter instructed me to give. He was a mere savage boy
from the central bogs of Connaught, and, to the great amusement of Lord
Westport, he persisted in calling me "your majesty" for the rest of
that day; and by all other means open to him he expressed his
penitence. But the dean insisted that, no matter for his penitence in
the matter of the bogs, he had certainly carried a pike at Vinegar
Hill; and probably had stolen a pair of boots at Furnes, when he kindly
made a call at the Deanery, in passing through that place to the field
of battle. It is always a pleasure to see the engineer of mischief
"hoist with his own petard;"
and it happened that the horses assigned to draw a post-chariot
carrying Lord Westport, myself, and the dean, on our return journey to
Dublin, were a pair utterly ruined by a certain under-postilion, named
Moran. This particular ruin did Mr. Moran boast to have contributed as
his separate contribution to the general ruinations of the stables. And
the particular object was, that _his_ horses, and consequently
himself, might be left in genial laziness. But, as Nemesis would have
it, Mr. Moran was the charioteer specially appointed to this particular
service. We were to return by easy journeys of twenty-five miles a day,
or even less; since every such interval brought us to the house of some
hospitable family, connected by friendship or by blood with Lord
Altamont. Fervently had Lord Westport pleaded with his father for an
allowance of four horses; not at all with any foolish view to fleeting
aristocratic splendor, but simply to the luxury of rapid motion. But
Lord Altamont was firm in resisting this petition at that time. The
remote consequence was, that by way of redressing the violated
equilibrium to our feelings, we subscribed throughout Wales to extort
six horses from the astonished innkeepers, most of whom declined the
requisition, and would furnish only four, on the plea that the leaders
would only embarrass the other horses; but one at Bangor, from whom we
coolly requested eight, recoiled from our demand as from a sort of
miniature treason. How so? Because in this island he had always
understood eight horses to be consecrated to royal use. Not at all, we
assured him; Pickford, the great carrier, always horsed his wagons with
eight. And the law knew of no distinction between wagon and post-
chaise, coach-horse or cart-horse. However, we could not compass this
point of the eight horses, the double _quadriga_, in one single
instance; but the true reason we surmised to be, not the pretended
puritanism of loyalty to the house of Guelph, but the running short of
the innkeeper's funds. If he had to meet a daily average call for
twenty-four horses, then it might well happen that our draft upon him
for eight horses at one pull would bankrupt him for a whole day.

But I am anticipating. Returning to Ireland and Mr. Moran, the vicious
driver of vicious horses, the immediate consequence to _him_ of
this unexpected limitation to a pair of horses was, that all his
knavery in one hour recoiled upon himself. The horses whom he had
himself trained to vice and restiveness, in the hope that thus his own
services and theirs might be less in request, now became the very curse
of his life. Every morning, duly as an attempt was made to put them in
motion, they began to back, and no arts, gentle or harsh, would for a
moment avail to coax or to coërce them into the counter direction.
Could retrogression by any metaphysics have been translated into
progress, we excelled in that; it was our _forte_; we could have
backed to the North Pole. That might be the way to glory, or at least
to distinction--_sic itur ad astra_; unfortunately, it was not the
way to Dublin. Consequently, on _every_ day of our journey--and
the days were ten--not once, but always, we had the same deadly
conflict to repeat; and this being always unavailing, found its
solution uniformly in the following ultimate resource. Two large-boned
horses, usually taken from the plough, were harnessed on as leaders. By
main force they hauled our wicked wheelers into the right direction,
and forced them, by pure physical superiority, into working. We
furnished a joyous and comic spectacle to every town and village
through which we passed. The whole community, men and children, came
out to assist at our departure; and all alike were diverted, but not
the less irritated, by the demoniac obstinacy of the brutes, who seemed
under the immediate inspiration of the fiend. Everybody was anxious to
share in the scourging which was administered to them right and left;
and once propelled into a gallop (or such a gallop as our Brobdignagian
leaders could accomplish), they were forced into keeping it up. But,
without rehearsing all the details of the case, it may be readily
conceived that the amount of trouble distributed amongst our whole
party was enormous. Once or twice the friends at whose houses we slept
were able to assist us. But generally they either had no horses, or
none of the commanding power demanded. Often, again, it happened, as
our route was very circuitous, that no inns lay in our neighborhood;
or, if there _were_ inns, the horses proved to be of too slight a
build. At Ballinasloe, and again at Athlone, half the town came out to
help us; and, having no suitable horses, thirty or forty men, with
shouts of laughter, pulled at ropes fastened to our pole and splinter-
bar, and compelled the snorting demons into a flying gallop. But,
naturally, a couple of miles saw this resource exhausted. Then came the
necessity of "drawing the covers," as the dean called it; that is,
hunting amongst the adjacent farmers for powerful cattle. This labor
(O, Jupiter, thanks be for _that_!) fell upon Mr. Moran. And
sometimes it would happen that the horses, which it had cost him three
or four hours to find, could be spared only for four or five miles.
Such a journey can rarely have been accomplished. Our zigzag course had
prolonged it into from two hundred and thirty to two hundred and fifty
miles; and it is literally true that, of this entire distance from
Westport House to Sackville-street, Dublin, not one furlong had been
performed under the spontaneous impulse of our own horses. Their
diabolic resistance continued to the last. And one may venture to hope
that the sense of final subjugation to man must have proved penally
bitter to the horses. But, meantime, it vexes one that such wretches
should be fed with good old hay and oats; as well littered down also in
their stalls as a prebendary; and by many a stranger, ignorant of their
true character, should have been patted and caressed. Let us hope that
a fate, to which more than once they were nearly forcing _us_,
namely, regress over a precipice, may ultimately have been their own.
Once I saw such another case dramatically carried through to its
natural crisis in the Liverpool Mail. It was on the stage leading into
Lichfield; there was no conspiracy, as in our Irish case; one horse
only out of the four was the criminal; and, according to the queen's
bench (Denman, C. J.), there is no conspiracy competent to one agent;
but he was even more signally under a demoniac possession of mutinous
resistance to man. The case was really a memorable one. If ever there
was a distinct proclamation of rebellion against man, it was made by
that brutal horse; and I, therefore, being a passenger on the box, took
a note of the case; and on a proper occasion I may be induced to
publish it, unless some Houynhm should whinny against me a chancery
injunction.

From these wild, Tartar-like stables of Connaught, how vast was the
transition to that perfection of elegance, and of adaptation between
means and ends, that reigned from centre to circumference through the
stables at Laxton! _I_, as it happened, could report to Lord Massey
their earlier condition; he to me could report their immediate
changes. I won him easily to an interest in my own Irish experiences,
so fresh, and in parts so grotesque, wilder also by much in Connaught
than in Lord Massey's county of Limerick; whilst he (without affecting
any delight in the hunting systems of Northamptonshire and
Leicestershire) yet took pleasure in explaining to me those
characteristic features of the English midland hunting as centralized
at Melton, which even then gave to it the supreme rank for brilliancy
and unity of effect amongst all varieties of the chase.

Horses had formed the natural and introductory topic of conversation
between us. What we severally knew of Ireland, though in different
quarters,--what we both knew of Laxton, the barbaric splendor, and the
civilized splendor,--had naturally an interest for us both in their
contrasts (at one time so picturesque, at another so grotesque), which
illuminated our separate recollections. But my quick instinct soon made
me aware that a jealousy was gathering in Lord Massey's mind around
such a topic, as though too ostentatiously levelled to his particular
knowledge, or to his _animal_ condition of taste. But easily I
slipped off into another key. At Laxton, it happened that the library
was excellent. Founded by whom, I never heard; but certainly, when used
by a systematic reader, it showed itself to have been systematically
collected; it stretched pretty equably through two centuries,--namely,
from about 1600 to 1800,--and might, perhaps, amount to seventeen
thousand volumes. Lord Massey was far from illiterate; and his interest
in books was unaffected, if limited, and too often interrupted, by
defective knowledge. The library was dispersed through six or seven
small rooms, lying between the drawing-room in one wing, and the
dining-room in the opposite wing. This dispersion, however, already
furnished the ground of a rude classification. In some one of these
rooms was Lord Massey always to be found, from the forenoon to the
evening. And was it any fault of _his_ that his daughter, little
Grace, about two years old, pursued him down from her nursery every
morning, and insisted upon seeing innumerable pictures, lurking (as she
had discovered) in many different recesses of the library? More and
more from this quarter it was that we drew the materials of our daily
after-dinner conversation. One great discouragement arises commonly to
the student, where the particular library in which he reads has been so
disordinately collected that he cannot _pursue_ a subject once
started. Now, at Laxton, the books had been so judiciously brought
together, so many hooks and eyes connected them, that the whole library
formed what one might call a series of _strata_, naturally allied,
through which you might quarry your way consecutively for many months.
On rainy days, and often enough one had occasion to say through rainy
weeks, what a delightful resource did this library prove to both of us!
And one day it occurred to us, that, whereas the stables and the
library were both jewels of attraction, the latter had been by much the
least costly. Pretty often I have found, when any opening has existed
for making the computation, that, in a library containing a fair
proportion of books illustrated with plates, about ten shillings a
volume might be taken as expressing, upon a sufficiently large number
of volumes, small and great, the fair average cost of the whole. On
this basis, the library at Laxton would have cost less than nine
thousand pounds. On the other hand, thirty-live horses (hunters,
racers, roadsters, carriage-horses, etc.) might have cost about eight
thousand pounds, or a little more. But the library entailed no
permanent cost beyond the annual loss of interest; the books did not
eat, and required no aid from veterinary.

At Laxton it was that I first saw the entire aggregate labors,
brigaded, as it were, and paraded as if for martial review, of that
most industrious benefactor to the early stages of our English
historical literature, Thomas Hearne. Three hundred guineas, I believe,
had been the price paid cheerfully at one time for a complete set of
Hearne. At Laxton, also, it was that first I saw the total array of
works edited by Dr. Birch. It was a complete _armilustrium_, a
_recognitio_, or mustering, as it were, not of pompous Praetorian
cohorts, or unique guardsmen, but of the yeomanry, the militia, or
what, under the old form of expression, you might regard as the
_trained bands_ of our literature--the fund from which ultimately,
or in the last resort, students look for the materials of our vast and
myriad-faced literature. A French author of eminence, fifty years back,
having occasion to speak of our English literature collectively, in
reference to the one point of its _variety_, being also a man of
honor, and disdaining that sort of patriotism which sacrifices the
truth to nationality, speaks of our pretensions in these words: _Les
Anglois qui ont une littérature infiniment plus variée que la
nôtre_. This fact is a feature in our national pretensions that
could ever have been regarded doubtfully merely through insufficient
knowledge. Dr. Johnson, indeed, made it the distinguishing merit of the
French, that they "have a book upon every subject." But Dr. Johnson was
not only capricious as regards temper and variable humors, but as
regards the inequality of his knowledge. Incoherent and unsystematic
was Dr. Johnson's information in most cases. Hence his extravagant
misappraisement of Knolles, the Turkish historian, which is exposed so
severely by Spittler, the German, who, again, is himself miserably
superficial in his analysis of English history. Hence the feeble
credulity which Dr. Johnson showed with respect to the forgery of De
Foe (under the masque of Captain Carleton) upon the Catalonian campaign
of Lord Peterborough. But it is singular that a literature, so
unrivalled as ours in its compass and variety, should not have produced
any, even the shallowest, manual of itself. And thus it happens, for
example, that writers so laborious and serviceable as Birch are in any
popular sense scarcely known. I showed to Lord Massey, among others of
his works, that which relates to Lord Worcester's (that is, Lord
Glamorgan's) negotiations with the Papal nuncio in Ireland, about the
year 1644, &c. Connected with these negotiations were many names
amongst Lord Massey's own ancestors; so that here he suddenly alighted
upon a fund of archćologic memorabilia, connecting what interested him
as an Irishman in general with what most interested him as the head of
a particular family. It is remarkable, also, as an indication of the
_general_ nobility and elevation which had accompanied the revolution
in his life, that concurrently with the constitutional torpor
previously besetting him, had melted away the intellectual torpor
under which he had found books until recently of little practical
value. Lady Carbery had herself told me that the two revolutions
went on simultaneously. He began to take an interest in literature
when life itself unfolded a new interest, under the companionship
of his youthful wife. And here, by the way, as subsequently
in scores of other instances, I saw broad evidences of the credulity
with which we have adopted into our grave political faith the
rash and malicious sketches of our novelists. With Fielding commenced
the practice of systematically traducing our order of country
gentlemen. His picture of Squire Western is not only a malicious, but
also an incongruous libel. The squire's ordinary language is
impossible, being alternately bookish and absurdly rustic. In reality,
the conventional dialect ascribed to the rustic order in general--to
peasants even more than to gentlemen--in our English plays and novels,
is a childish and fantastic babble, belonging to no form of real
breathing life; nowhere intelligible; not in _any_ province;
whilst, at the same time, all provinces--Somersetshire, Devonshire,
Hampshire--are confounded with our midland counties; and positively the
diction of Parricombe and Charricombe from Exmoor Forest is mixed up
with the pure Icelandic forms of the English lakes, of North Yorkshire,
and of Northumberland. In Scotland, it needs but a slight intercourse
with the peasantry to distinguish various dialects--the Aberdonian and
Fifeshire, for instance, how easily distinguished, even by an English
alien, from the western dialects of Ayrshire, &c.! And I have heard it
said, by Scottish purists in this matter, that even Sir Walter Scott is
chargeable with considerable licentiousness in the management of his
colloquial Scotch. Yet, generally speaking, it bears the strongest
impress of truthfulness. But, on the other hand, how false and
powerless does this same Sir Walter become, when the necessities of his
tale oblige him at any time to come amongst the English peasantry! His
magic wand is instantaneously broken; and he moves along by a babble of
impossible forms, as fantastic as any that our London theatres have
traditionally ascribed to English rustics, to English sailors, and to
Irishmen universally. Fielding is open to the same stern criticism, as
a deliberate falsehood-monger; and from the same cause--want of energy
to face the difficulty of mastering a real living idiom. This defect in
language, however, I cite only as one feature in the complex falsehood
which disfigures Fielding's portrait of the English country gentleman.
Meantime the question arises, Did he mean his Squire Western for a
_representative_ portrait? Possibly not. He might design it expressly
as a sketch of an individual, and by no means of a class. And
the fault may be, after all, not in _him_, the writer, but in
_us_, the falsely interpreting readers. But, be that as it may,
and figure to ourselves as we may the rustic squire of a hundred to a
hundred and fifty years back (though manifestly at utter war, in the
portraitures of our novelists, with the realities handed down to us by
our Parliamentary annals), on that _arena_ we are dealing with
objects of pure speculative curiosity. Far different is the same
question, when practically treated for purposes of present legislation
or philosophic inference. One hundred years ago, such was the
difficulty of social intercourse, simply from the difficulty of
locomotion (though even then this difficulty was much lowered to the
English, as beyond comparison the most equestrian of nations), that it
is possible to imagine a shade of difference as still distinguishing
the town-bred man from the rustic; though, considering the multiplied
distribution of our assize towns, our cathedral towns, our sea-ports,
and our universities, all so many recurring centres of civility, it is
not very easy to imagine such a thing in an island no larger than ours.
But can any human indulgence be extended to the credulity which assumes
the same possibility as existing for us in the very middle of the
nineteenth century? At a time when every week sees the town banker
drawn from our rural gentry; railway directors in every quarter
transferring themselves indifferently from town to country, from
country to town; lawyers, clergymen, medical men, magistrates, local
judges, &c., all shifting in and out between town and country; rural
families all intermarrying on terms of the widest freedom with town
families; all again, in the persons of their children, meeting for
study at the same schools, colleges, military academies, &c.; by what
furious forgetfulness of the realities belonging to the case, has it
been possible for writers in public journals to persist in arguing
national questions upon the assumption of a bisection in our
population--a double current, on the one side steeped to the lips in
town prejudices, on the other side traditionally sold to rustic views
and doctrines? Such double currents, like the Rhone flowing through the
Lake of Geneva, and yet refusing to intermingle, probably _did_
exist, and had an important significance in the Low Countries of the
fifteenth century, or between the privileged cities and the
unprivileged country of Germany down to the Thirty Years' War; but, for
us, they are in the last degree fabulous distinctions, pure fairy
tales; and the social economist or the historian who builds on such
phantoms as that of a rustic aristocracy still retaining any
substantial grounds of distinction from the town aristocracies,
proclaims the hollowness of any and all his doctrines that depend upon
such assumptions. Lord Carbery was a thorough fox-hunter. The fox-
hunting of the adjacent county of Leicestershire was not then what it
is now. The state of the land was radically different for the foot of
the horse, the nature and distribution of the fences was different; so
that a class of horses thoroughly different was then required. But
then, as now, it offered the finest exhibition of the fox-chase that is
known in Europe; and then, as now, this is the best adapted among all
known varieties of hunting to the exhibition of adventurous and skilful
riding, and generally, perhaps, to the development of manly and
athletic qualities. Lord Carbery, during the season, might be
immoderately addicted to this mode of sporting, having naturally a
pleasurable feeling connected with his own reputation as a skilful and
fearless horseman. But, though the chases were in those days longer
than they are at present, small was the amount of time really
abstracted from that which he had disposable for general purposes;
amongst which purposes ranked foremost his literary pursuits. And,
however much he transcended the prevailing conception of his order, as
sketched by satiric and often ignorant novelists, he might be regarded,
in all that concerned the liberalization of his views, as pretty fairly
representing that order. Thus, through every _real_ experience,
the crazy notion of a rural aristocracy flowing apart from the urban
aristocracy, and standing on a different level of culture as to
intellect, of polish as to manners, and of interests as to social
objects, a notion at all times false as a fact, now at length became
with all thoughtful men monstrous as a possibility.

Meantime Lord Massey was reached by reports, both through Lady Carbery
and myself, of something which interested him more profoundly than all
earthly records of horsemanship, or any conceivable questions connected
with books. Lady Carbery, with a view to the amusement of Lady Massey
and my sister, for both of whom youth and previous seclusion had
created a natural interest in all such scenes, accepted two or three
times in every week dinner invitations to all the families on her
visiting list, and lying within her winter circle, which was measured,
by a radius of about seventeen miles. For, dreadful as were the roads
in those days, when the Bath, the Bristol, or the Dover mail was
equally perplexed oftentimes to accomplish Mr. Palmer's rate of seven
miles an hour, a distance of seventeen was yet easily accomplished in
one hundred minutes by the powerful Laxton horses. Magnificent was the
Laxton turn-out; and in the roomy travelling coach of Lady Carbery,
made large enough to receive upon occasion even a bed, it would have
been an idle scruple to fear the crowding a party which mustered only
three besides myself. For Lord Massey uniformly declined joining us; in
which I believe that he was right. A schoolboy like myself had
fortunately no dignity to lose. But Lord Massey, a needy Irish peer
(or, strictly speaking, since the Union no peer at all, though still an
hereditary lord), was bound to be trebly vigilant over his surviving
honors. This he owed to his country as well as to his family. He
recoiled from what he figured to himself (but too often falsely
figured) as the haughty and disdainful English nobility---all so rich,
all so polished in manner, all so punctiliously correct in the ritual
of _bienséance_. Lord Carbery might face them gayly and boldly:
for _he_ was rich, and, although possessing Irish estates and an
Irish mansion, was a thorough Englishman by education and early
association. "But I," said Lord Massey, "had a careless Irish
education, and am never quite sure that I may not be trespassing on
some mysterious law of English good-breeding." In vain I suggested to
him that most of what passed amongst foreigners and amongst Irishmen
for English _hauteur_ was pure reserve, which, among all people
that were bound over by the inevitable restraints of their rank
(imposing, it must be remembered, jealous duties as well as
privileges), was sure to become the operative feeling. I contended that
in the English situation there was no escaping this English reserve,
except by great impudence and defective sensibility; and that, if
examined, reserve was the truest expression of respect towards those
who were its objects. In vain did Lady Carbery back me in this
representation. He stood firm, and never once accompanied us to any
dinner-party. Northamptonshire, I know not why, is (or then was) more
thickly sown with aristocratic families than any in the kingdom. Many
elegant and pretty women there naturally were in these parties; but
undoubtedly our two Laxton baronesses shone advantageously amongst
them. A boy like myself could lay no restraint upon the after-dinner
feelings of the gentlemen; and almost uniformly I heard such verdicts
passed upon the personal attractions of both, but especially Lady
Massey, as tended greatly to soothe the feelings of Lord Massey. It is
singular that Lady Massey universally carried off the palm of unlimited
homage. Lady Carbery was a regular beauty, and publicly known for such;
both were fine figures, and apparently not older than twenty-six; but
in her Irish friend people felt something more thoroughly artless and
feminine--for the masculine understanding of Lady Carbery in some way
communicated its commanding expression to her deportment. I reported to
Lord Massey, in terms of unexceptionable decorum, those flattering
expressions of homage, which sometimes from the lips of young men,
partially under the influence of wine, had taken a form somewhat too
enthusiastic for a literal repetition to a chivalrous and adoring
husband.

Meantime, the reader has been kept long enough at Laxton to warrant me
in presuming some curiosity or interest to have gathered within his
mind about the mistress of the mansion. Who was Lady Carbery? what was
her present position, and what had been her original position, in
society? All readers of Bishop Jeremy Taylor must be aware of that religious
Lady Carbery, who was the munificent (and, for her kindness, one might
say the filial) patroness of the all-eloquent and subtle divine. She
died before the Restoration, and, consequently, before her spiritual
director could have ascended the Episcopal throne. The title of Carbery
was at that time an earldom; the earl married again, arid his second
countess was also a devout patroness of Taylor. Having no peerage at
hand, I do not know by what mode of derivation the modern title of the
nineteenth century had descended from the old one of the seventeenth. I
presume that some collateral branch of the original family had
succeeded to the barony when the limitations of the original settlement
had extinguished the earldom. But to me, who saw revived another
religious Lady Carbery, distinguished for her beauty and
accomplishments, it was interesting to read of the two successive
ladies who had borne that title one hundred and sixty years before, and
whom no reader of Jeremy Taylor is ever allowed to forget, since almost
all his books are dedicated to one or other of the pious family that
had protected him. Once more there was a religious Lady Carbery,
supporting locally the Church of England, patronizing schools,
diffusing the most extensive relief to every mode of indigence or
distress. A century and a half ago such a Lady Carbery was in South
Wales, at the "Golden Grove;" now such another Lady Carbery was in
central England, at Laxton. The two cases, divided by six generations,
interchanged a reciprocal interest, since in both cases it was young
ladies, under the age of thirty, that originated the movement, and in
both cases these ladies bore the same title; and I will therefore
retrace rapidly the outline of that contemporary case so familiarly
known to myself.

Colonel Watson and General Smith had been amongst the earliest friends
of my mother's family. Both served for many years in India: the first
in the Company's army, the other upon the staff of the king's forces in
that country. Each, about the same time, made a visit to England, and
each of them, I believe, with the same principal purpose of providing
for the education of his daughter; for each happened to have one sole
child, which child, in each case, was a girl of singular beauty; and
both of these little ladies were entitled to very large fortunes. The
colonel and the general, being on brotherly terms of intimacy, resolved
to combine their plans for the welfare of their daughters. What they
wanted was, not a lady that could teach them any special arts or
accomplishments--all these could be purchased;--but the two
qualifications indispensable for the difficult situation of lady-
superintendent over two children so singularly separated from all
relatives whatever, were, in the first place, knowledge of the world,
and integrity for keeping at a distance all showy adventurers that
might else offer themselves, with unusual advantages, as suitors for
the favor of two great heiresses; and, secondly, manners exquisitely
polished. Looking to that last requisition, it seems romantic to
mention, that the lady selected for the post, with the fullest
approbation of both officers, was one who began life as the daughter of
a little Lincolnshire farmer. What her maiden name had been, I do not
at this moment remember; but this name was of very little importance,
being soon merged in that of Harvey, bestowed on her at the altar by a
country gentleman. The squire--not very rich, I believe, but rich
enough to rank as a matrimonial prize in the lottery of a country girl,
whom one single step of descent in life might have brought within sight
of menial service--had been captivated by the young woman's beauty; and
this, at that period, when accompanied by the advantages of youth, must
have been resplendent. I, who had known her all my life, down to my
sixteenth year (during which year she died), and who naturally,
therefore, referred her origin back to some remote ancestral
generation, nevertheless, in her sole case, was made to feel that there
might be some justification for the Church of England discountenancing
in her Liturgy, "marriage with your great-grandmother; neither shalt
thou marry thy great-grandfather's widow." She, poor thing! at that
time was thinking little of marriage; for even then, though known only
to herself and her _femme de chambre_, that dreadful organic malady
(cancer) was raising its adder's crest, under which finally she
died. But, in spite of languor interchanging continually with
disfiguring anguish, she still impressed one as a regal beauty. Her
person, indeed, and figure, _would_ have tended towards such a
standard; but all was counteracted, and thrown back into the mould of
sweet natural womanhood, by the cherubic beauty of her features. These
it was--these features, so purely childlike--that reconciled me in a
moment of time to great-grandmotherhood. The stories about Ninon de
l'Enclos are French fables--speaking plainly, are falsehoods; and sorry
I am that a nation so amiable as the French should habitually disregard
truth, when coming into collision with their love for the extravagant.
But, if anything could reconcile me to these monstrous old fibs about
Ninon at ninety, it would be the remembrance of this English
enchantress on the high-road to seventy. Guess, reader, what she must
have been at twenty-eight to thirty-two, when she became the widow of
the Gerenian horseman, Harvey. How bewitching she must have looked in
her widow's caps! So had once thought Colonel Watson, who happened to
be in England at that period; and to the charming widow this man of war
propounded his hand in marriage. This hand, this martial hand, for
reason inexplicable to me, Mrs. Harvey declined; and the colonel
bounced off in a rage to Bengal. There were others who saw young Mrs.
Harvey, as well as Colonel Watson. And amongst them was an ancient
German gentleman, to what century belonging I do not know, who had
every possible bad quality known to European experience, and a solitary
good one, namely, eight hundred thousand pounds sterling. The man's
name was Schreiber. Schreiber was an aggregate resulting from the
conflux of all conceivable bad qualities. That was the elementary base
of Schreiber; and the superstructure, or Corinthian decoration of his
frontispiece, was, that Schreiber cultivated one sole science, namely,
the science of taking snuff. Here were two separate objects for
contemplation: one, bright as Aurora--that radiant Koh-i-noor, or
mountain of light--the eight hundred thousand pounds; the other, sad,
fuscous, begrimed with the snuff of ages, namely, the most ancient
Schreiber. Ah! if they _could_ have been divided--these twin yoke-
fellows--and that ladies might have the privilege of choosing between
them! For the moment there was no prudent course open to Mrs. Harvey,
but that of marrying Schreiber (which she did, and survived); and,
subsequently, when the state of the market became favorable to such
"conversions" of stock, then the new Mrs. Schreiber parted from
Schreiber, and disposed of her interest in Schreiber at a settled rate
in three per cent. consols and terminable annuities; for every
_coupon_ of Schreiber receiving a _bonus_ of so many thousand pounds,
paid down according to the rate agreed on by the lawyers of the
two parties; or, strictly speaking, _quarrelled on_ between the
adverse factions; for agreement it was hard to effect upon any point.
The deadly fear which had been breathed into him by Mrs. Schreiber's
scale of expenditure in a Park Lane house proved her most salutary
ally. Coerced by this horrid vision, Schreiber consented (which else he
never would have done) to grant her an allowance, for life, of about
two thousand per annum. Could _that_ be reckoned an anodyne for
the torment connected with a course of Schreiber? I pretend to no
opinion.

Such were the facts: and exactly at this point in her career had Mrs.
Schreiber arrived, when, once more, Colonel Watson and General Smith
were visiting England, and for the last time, on the errand of settling
permanently some suitable establishment for their two infant daughters.
The superintendence of this they desired to devolve upon some lady,
qualified by her manners and her connections for introducing the young
ladies, when old enough, into general society. Mrs. Schreiber was the
very person required. Intellectually she had no great pretensions; but
these she did not need: her character was irreproachable, her manners
were polished, and her own income placed her far above all mercenary
temptations. She had not thought fit to accept the station of Colonel
Watson's wife, but some unavowed feeling prompted her to undertake,
with enthusiasm, the duties of a mother to the colonel's daughter.
Chiefly on Miss Watson's account it was at first that she extended her
maternal cares to General Smith's daughter; but very soon so sweet and
winning was the disposition of Miss Smith that Mrs. Schreiber
apparently loved _her_ the best.

Both, however, appeared under a combination of circumstances too
singularly romantic to fail of creating an interest that was universal.
Both were solitary children, unchallenged by any relatives. Neither had
ever known what it was to taste of love, paternal or maternal. Their
mothers had been long dead--not consciously seen by either; and their
fathers, not surviving their last departure from home long enough to
see them again, died before returning from India. What a world of
desolation seemed to exist for them! How silent was every hall into
which, by natural right, they should have had entrance! Several people,
kind, cordial people, men and women, were scattered over England, that,
during their days of infancy, would have delighted to receive them;
but, by some fatality, when they reached their fifteenth year, and
might have been deemed old enough to undertake visits, all of these
paternal friends, except two, had died; nor had they, by that time, any
relatives at all that remained alive, or were eligible as associates.
Strange, indeed, was the contrast between the silent past of their
lives and that populous future to which their large fortunes would
probably introduce them. Throw open a door in the rear that should lay
bare the long vista of chambers through which their childhood might
symbolically be represented as having travelled--what silence! what
solemn solitude! Open a door in advance that should do the same
figurative office for the future--suddenly what a jubilation! what a
tumult of festal greetings!

But the succeeding stages of life did not, perhaps, in either case
fully correspond to the early promise. Rank and station the two young
ladies attained; but rank and station do not always throw people upon
prominent stages of action or display. Many a family, possessing both
rank and wealth, and not undistinguished possibly by natural endowments
of an order fitted for brilliant popularity, never emerge from
obscurity, or not into any splendor that can be called national;
sometimes, perhaps, from a temper unfitted for worthy struggles in the
head of the house; possibly from a haughty, possibly a dignified
disdain of popular arts, hatred of petty rhetoric, petty sycophantic
courtships, petty canvassing tricks; or again, in many cases, because
accidents of ill-luck have intercepted the fair proportion of success
due to the merits of the person; whence, oftentimes, a hasty self-
surrender to impulses of permanent disgust. But, more frequently than
any other cause, I fancy that impatience of the long struggle required
for any distinguished success interferes to thin the ranks of
competitors for the prizes of public ambition. Perseverance is soon
refrigerated in those who fall back under any result, defeated or not
defeated, upon splendid mansions and luxuries of every kind, already
far beyond their needs or their wishes. The soldier described by the
Roman satirist as one who had lost his purse, was likely enough, under
the desperation of his misfortune, to see nothing formidable in any
obstacle that crossed his path towards another supplementary purse;
whilst the very same obstacle might reasonably alarm one who, in
retreating, fell back under the battlements of twenty thousand per
annum. In the present case, there was nothing at all to move wonder in
the final result under so continual a siege of temptation from the
seductions of voluptuous ease; the only wonder is, that one of the
young ladies, namely, Miss Watson, whose mind was masculine, and in
some directions aspiring, should so readily have acquiesced in a result
which she might have anticipated from the beginning.

Happy was the childhood, happy the early dawn of womanhood, which these
two young ladies passed under the guardianship of Mrs. Schreiber.
Education in those days was not the austere old lady that she is now.
At least, in the case of young ladies, her exactions were merciful and
considerate. If Miss Smith sang pretty well, and Miss Watson
_very_ well, and with the power of singing difficult _part_ music
at sight, they did so for the same reason that the lark sings,
and chiefly under the same gentle tuition--that of nature, glad
almighty nature, breathing inspiration from her Delphic tripod of
happiness, and health, and hope. Mrs. Schreiber pretended to no
intellectual gifts whatever; and yet, practically, she was wiser than
many who have the greatest. First of all other tasks which she imposed
upon her wards, was that of daily exercise, and exercise carried to
_excess_. She insisted upon four hours' exercise daily; and, as
young ladies walk fast, _that_ would have yielded, at the rate of
three and a half miles per hour, thirteen plus one third miles. But
only two and a half hours were given to walking; the other one and a
half to riding. No day was a day of rest; absolutely none. Days so
stormy that they "kept the raven to her nest," snow the heaviest, winds
the most frantic, were never listened to as any ground of reprieve from
the ordinary exaction. I once knew (that is, not personally, for I
never saw her, but through the reports of her many friends) an intrepid
lady, living in the city of London (that is,
technically the _city_, as opposed to Westminster, etc., Mary-le-
bone, etc.), who made a point of turning out her newborn infants for a
pretty long airing, even on the day of their birth. It made no
difference to her whether the month were July or January; good,
undeniable air is to be had in either month. Once only she was baffled,
and most indignant it made her, because the little thing chose to be
born at half-past nine P. M.; so that, by the time its toilet was
finished, bonnet and cloak all properly adjusted, the watchman was
calling "Past eleven, and a cloudy night;" upon which, most
reluctantly, she was obliged to countermand the orders for that day's
exercise, and considered herself, like the Emperor Titus, to have lost
a day. But what came of the London lady's or of Mrs. Schreiber's
Spartan discipline? Did the little blind kittens of Gracechurch-street,
who were ordered by their penthesiléan mamma, on the very day of their
nativity, to face the most cruel winds--did _they_, or did Mrs.
Schreiber's wards, justify, in after life, this fierce discipline, by
commensurate results of hardiness? In words written beyond all doubt by
Shakspeare, though not generally recognized as his, it might have been
said to any one of this Amazonian brood,--

                   "Now mild may be thy life;
  For a more blust'rous birth had never babe.
  Quiet and gentle be thy temperature;
  For thou'rt the rudeliest welcomed to this world
  That e'er was woman's child. Happy be the sequel!
  Thou hast as chiding a nativity
  As fire, air, water, earth, and heaven, can make,
  To herald thee from darkness!"--_Pericles, Act III._

As to the city kittens, I heard that the treatment prospered; but the
man who reported this added, that by original constitution they were as
strong as Meux's dray-horses; and thus, after all, they may simply
illustrate the old logical _dictum_ ascribed to some medical man,
that the reason why London children of the wealthier classes are
noticeable even to a proverb for their robustness and bloom, is because
none but those who are already vigorous to excess, and who start with
advantages of health far beyond the average scale, have much chance of
surviving that most searching quarantine, which, in such an atmosphere, they are
summoned to weather at starting. Coming, however, to the special case
of Mrs. Schreiber's household, I am bound to report that in no instance
have I known young ladies so thoroughly steeled against all the
ordinary host of petty maladies which, by way of antithesis to the
capital warfare of dangerous complaints, might be called the
_guerilla_ nosology; influenza, for instance, in milder forms,
catarrh, headache, toothache, dyspepsia in transitory shapes, etc.
Always the spirits of the two girls were exuberant; the enjoyment of
life seemed to be intense, and never did I know either of them to
suffer from _ennui_. My conscious knowledge of them commenced when
I was about two years old, they being from ten to twelve years older.
Mrs. Schreiber had been amongst my mother's earliest friends as Mrs.
Harvey, and in days when my mother had opportunities of doing her
seasonable services. And as there were three special advantages which
adorned my mother, and which ranked in Mrs. Schreiber's estimate as the
highest which earth could show, namely: 1°, that she spoke and wrote
English with singular elegance; 2°, that her manners were eminently
polished; and 3°, that, even in that early stage of my mother's life, a
certain tone of religiosity, and even of ascetic devotion, was already
diffused as a luminous mist that served to exalt the coloring of her
morality. To this extent Mrs. Schreiber approved of religion; but
nothing of a sectarian cast could she have tolerated; nor had she
anything of that nature to apprehend from my mother. Viewing my mother,
therefore, as a pure model of an English matron, and feeling for her,
besides, a deeper sentiment of friendship and affection than for
anybody else on her visiting list, it was natural enough that she
should come with her wards on an annual visit to "The Farm" (a pretty,
rustic dwelling occupied by my father in the neighborhood of
Manchester), and subsequently (when _that_ arose) to Greenhay. As my father always retained a town-house in Manchester
(somewhere in Fountain-street), and, though a plain, unpretending man,
was literary to the extent of having written a book, all things were so
arranged that there was no possibility of any commercial mementos ever
penetrating to the rural retreat of his family; such mementos, I mean,
as, by reviving painful recollections of that ancient Schreiber, who
was or ought to be by this time extinct, would naturally be odious and
distressing. Here, therefore, liberated from all jealousy of
overlooking eyes, such as haunted persons of their expectations at
Brighton, Weymouth, Sidmouth, or Bath, Miss Smith and Miss Watson used
to surrender themselves without restraint to their glad animal impulses
of girlish gayety, like the fawns of antelopes when suddenly
transferred from tiger-haunted thickets to the serene preserves of
secluded rajahs. On these visits it was, that I, as a young pet whom
they carried about like a doll from my second to my eighth or ninth
year, learned to know them; so as to take a fraternal interest in the
succeeding periods of their lives. Their fathers I certainly had not
seen; nor had they, consciously. These two fathers must both have died
in India, before my inquiries had begun to travel in that direction.
But, as old acquaintances of my mother's, both had visited The Farm
before I was born; and about General Smith, in particular, there had
survived amongst the servants a remembrance which seemed to us (that is
to them and to myself) ludicrously awful, though, at that time, the
practice was common throughout our Indian possessions. He had a Hindoo
servant with him; and this servant every night stretched himself along
the "sill" or outer threshold of the door; so that he might have been
trodden on by the general when retiring to rest; and from this it was
but a moderate step in advance to say that he _was_ trodden on. Upon
which basis many other wonders were naturally reared. Miss Smith's
father, therefore, furnished matter for a not very amiable tradition;
but Miss Smith herself was the sweetest-tempered and the loveliest of
girls, and the most thoroughly English in the style of her beauty. Far
different every way was Miss Watson. In person she was a finished
beauty of the very highest pretensions, and generally recognized as
such; that is to say, her figure was fine and queenly; her features
were exquisitely cut, as regarded their forms and the correspondences
of their parts; and usually by artists her face was said to be Grecian.
Perhaps the nostrils, mouth, and forehead, might be so; but nothing
could be less Grecian, or more eccentric in form and position, than the
eyes. They were placed obliquely, in a way that I do not remember to
have seen repeated in any other face whatever. Large they were, and
particularly long, tending to an almond-shape; equally strange, in
fact, as to color, shape, and position: but the remarkable position of
these eyes would have absorbed your gaze to the obliteration of all
other features or peculiarities in the face, were it not for one other
even more remarkable distinction affecting her complexion: this lay in
a suffusion that mantled upon her cheeks, of a color amounting almost
to carmine. Perhaps it might be no more than what Pindar meant by the
_porphyreon phos erotos_, which Gray has falsely translated as "the bloom of
young desire, and PURPLE light of love." It was not unpleasing, and
gave a lustre to the eyes, but it added to the eccentricity of the
face; and by all strangers it was presumed to be an artificial color,
resulting from some mode of applying a preparation more brilliant than
rouge. But to us children, so constantly admitted to her toilet, it was
well known to be entirely natural. Generally speaking, it is not likely
to assist the effect of a young woman's charms, that she presents any
such variety in her style of countenance as could naturally be called
_odd_. But Miss Watson, by the somewhat scenical effect resulting
from the harmony between her fine figure and her fine countenance,
triumphed over all that might else have been thought a blemish; and
when she was presented at court on occasion of her marriage, the king
himself pronounced her, to friends of Mrs. Schreiber, the most splendid
of all the brides that had yet given lustre to his reign. In such cases
the judgments of rustic, undisciplined tastes, though marked by
narrowness, and often by involuntary obedience to vulgar ideals (which,
for instance, makes them insensible to all the deep sanctities of
beauty that sleep amongst the Italian varieties of the Madonna face),
is not without its appropriate truth. Servants and rustics all thrilled
in sympathy with the sweet English loveliness of Miss Smith; but all
alike acknowledged, with spontaneous looks of homage, the fine presence
and finished beauty of Miss Watson. Naturally, from the splendor with
which they were surrounded, and the notoriety of their great
expectations,--so much to dazzle in one direction, and, on the other
hand, something for as tender a sentiment as pity, in the fact of both
from so early an age having been united in the calamity of orphanage,--
go where they might, these young women drew all eyes upon themselves;
and from the _audible_ comparisons sometimes made between them, it
might be imagined that if ever there were a situation fitted to nourish
rivalship and jealousy, between two girls, here it might be anticipated
in daily operation. But, left to themselves, the yearnings of the
female heart tend naturally towards what is noble; and, unless where it
has been tried too heavily by artificial incitements applied to the
pride, I do not believe that women generally are disposed to any
unfriendly jealousy of each other. Why should they? Almost every woman,
when strengthened in those charms which nature has given to her by such
as she can in many ways give to herself, must feel that she has her own
separate domain of empire unaffected by the most sovereign beauty upon
earth. Every man that ever existed has probably his own peculiar talent
(if only it were detected), in which he would be found to excel all the
rest of his race. And in every female face possessing any attractions
at all, no matter what may be her general inferiority, there lurks some
secret peculiarity of expression--some mesmeric individuality--which is
valid within its narrower range--limited superiority over the supreme
of beauties within a narrow circle. It is unintelligibly but
mesmerically potent, this secret fascination attached to features
oftentimes that are absolutely plain; and as one of many cases within
my own range of positive experience, I remember in confirmation, at
this moment, that in a clergyman's family, counting three daughters,
all on a visit to my mother, the youngest, Miss F---- P----, who was
strikingly and memorably plain, never walked out on the Clifton Downs
unattended, but she was followed home by a crowd of admiring men,
anxious to learn her rank and abode; whilst the middle sister,
eminently handsome, levied no such _visible_ tribute of admiration
on the public.

I mention this fact, one of a thousand similar facts, simply by way of
reminding the reader of what he must himself have often witnessed;
namely, that no woman is condemned by nature to any ignoble necessity
of repining against the power of other women; her own may be far more
confined, but within its own circle may possibly, measured against that
of the haughtiest beauty, be the profounder. However, waiving the
question thus generally put here, and as it specially affected these
two young women that virtually were sisters, any question of precedency
in power or display, when brought into collision with sisterly
affection, had not a momentary existence. Each had soon redundant
proofs of her own power to attract suitors without end; and, for the
more or the less, _that_ was felt to be a matter of accident.
Never, on this earth, I am satisfied, did that pure sisterly love
breathe a more steady inspiration than now into the hearts and through
the acts of these two generous girls; neither was there any sacrifice
which either would have refused _to_ or _for_ the other. The
period, however, was now rapidly shortening during which they would
have any opportunity for testifying this reciprocal love. Suitors were
flocking around them, as rank as cormorants in a storm. The grim old
chancellor (one, if not both, of the young ladies having been a ward in
Chancery) had all his legal jealousies awakened on their behalf. The
worshipful order of _adventurers_ and _fortune-hunters_, at that
time chiefly imported from Ireland, as in times more recent from
Germany, and other moustachoed parts of the continent, could not live
under the raking fire of Mrs. Schreiber, on the one side, with her
female tact and her knowledge of life, and of the chancellor, with his
huge discretional power, on the other. That particular chancellor, whom
the chronology of the case brought chiefly into connection with Miss
Watson's interests, was (if my childish remembrances do not greatly
mislead me) the iracund Lord Thurlow. Lovers and wooers this grim
lawyer regarded as the most impertinent order of animals in universal
zoology; and of these, in Miss Watson's case, he had a whole menagerie
to tend. Penelope, according to some school-boy remembrance of mine,
had one hundred and eighteen suitors. These young ladies had almost as
many. Heavens! I what a crew of Comus to follow or to lead! And what a
suitable person was this truculent old lord on the woolsack to enact
the part of shepherd--Corydon, suppose, or Alphesibćus--to this goodly
set of lambs! How he must have admired the hero of the "Odyssey," who
in one way or other accounted for all the wooers that "sorned" upon his
house, and had a receipt for their bodies from the grave-digger of
Ithaca! But even this wily descendant of Sisyphus would have found it
no such easy matter to deal with the English suitors, who were not the
feeble voluptuaries of the Ionian Islands, that suffered themselves to
be butchered as unresistingly as sheep in the shambles--actually
standing at one end of a banqueting-room to be shot at with bows and
arrows, not having pluck enough to make a rush--but were _game_
men; all young, strong, rich, and in most cases technically "noble;"
all, besides, contending for one or other of two prizes a thousand
times better fitted to inspire romantic ardor than the poor, withered
Penelope. One, by the way, amongst these suitors (I speak of those who
addressed Miss Watson), merits a separate commemoration, as having
drawn from Sheridan his very happiest _impromptu_--and an _impromptu_
that was really such--(the rarest of all things from Sheridan).
This was Lord Belgrave, eldest son of Lord Grosvenorthen an
earl, but at some period, long subsequent to this, raised to the
Marquisate of Westminster, a title naturally suggesting in itself a
connection with the vast Grosvenor property, sweeping across the whole
area of that most aristocratic region in the metropolis now called
_Belgravia_, which was then a name unknown; and this Hesperian
region had as yet no architectural value, and consequently no ground-
rent value, simply because the world of fashion and distinction had as
yet not expanded itself in that direction. In those days the
territorial importance of this great house rested exclusively upon its
connection with the county of Chester. In this connection it was that
the young Viscount Belgrave had been introduced, by his family
interest, into the House of Commons; he had delivered his maiden speech
with some effect; and had been heard favorably on various subsequent
occasions; on one of which it was that, to the extreme surprise of the
house, he terminated his speech with a passage from Demosthenes--not
presented in English, but in sounding Attic Greek. Latin is a
privileged dialect in parliament. But Greek! It would not have been at
all more startling to the usages of the house, had his lordship quoted
Persic or Telinga. Still, though felt as something verging on the
ridiculous, there was an indulgent feeling to a young man fresh from
academic bowers, which would not have protected a mature man of the
world. Everybody bit his lips, and as yet did _not_ laugh. But the
final issue stood on the edge of a razor. A gas, an inflammable
atmosphere, was trembling sympathetically through the whole excited
audience; all depended on a match being applied to this gas whilst yet
in the very act of escaping. Deepest silence still prevailed; and, had
any commonplace member risen to address the house in an ordinary
business key, all would have blown over. Unhappily for Lord Belgrave,
in that critical moment up rose the one solitary man, to wit, Sheridan,
whose look, whose voice, whose traditional character, formed a prologue
to what was coming. Here let the reader understand that, throughout the
"Iliad," all speeches or commands, questions or answers, are introduced
by Homer under some peculiar formula. For instance, replies are usually
introduced thus:

Simply to have commenced his answer in Greek would have sufficiently
met the comic expectation then thrilling the house; but, when it
happened that this Greek (so suitable to the occasion) was also the one
sole morsel of Greek that everybody in that assembly understood, the
effect, as may be supposed, was overwhelming, and wrapt the whole house
in what might be called a fiery explosion of laughter. Meantime, as
prizes in the matrimonial lottery, and prizes in all senses, both young
ladies were soon carried off. Miss Smith, whose expectations I never
happened to hear estimated, married a great West India proprietor; and
Miss Watson, who (according to the popular report) would succeed to six
thousand a year on her twenty-first birthday, married Lord Carbery.
Miss Watson inherited also from her father something which would not
generally be rated very highly, namely, a chancery lawsuit, with the
East India Company for defendant. However, if the company is a potent
antagonist, thus far it is an eligible one, that, in the event of
losing the suit, the honorable company is solvent; and such an event,
after some nine or ten years' delay, did really befall the company. The
question at issue respected some docks which Colonel Watson had built
for the company in some Indian port. And in the end this lawsuit,
though so many years doubtful in its issue, proved very valuable to
Miss Watson; I have heard (but cannot vouch for it) not less valuable
than that large part of her property which had been paid over without
demur upon her twenty-first birth-day. Both young ladies married
happily; but in marriage they found their separation, and in that
separation a shock to their daily comfort which was never replaced to
either. As to Miss Smith's husband, I did not know him; but Lord
Carbery was every way an estimable man; in some things worthy of
admiration; and his wife never ceased to esteem and admire him. But she
yearned for the society of her early friend; and this being placed out
of her reach by the accidents of life, she fell early into a sort of
disgust with her own advantages of wealth and station, which, promising
so much, were found able to perform nothing at all in this first and
last desire of her heart. A portrait of her friend hung in the drawing-
room; but Lady Carbery did not willingly answer the questions that were
sometimes prompted by its extraordinary loveliness. There are women to
whom a female friendship is indispensable, and cannot be supplied by
any companion of the other sex. That blessing, therefore, of her golden
youth, turned eventually into a curse for her after-life; for I believe
that, through one accident or another, they never met again after they
became married women. To me, as one of those who had known and loved
Miss Smith, Lady Carbery always turned the more sunny side of her
nature; but to the world generally she presented a chilling and
somewhat severe aspect--as to a vast illusion that rested upon pillars
of mockery and frauds. Honors, beauty of the first order, wealth, and
the power which follows wealth as its shadow--what could these do? what
_had_ they done? In proportion as they had settled heavily upon
herself, she had found them to entail a load of responsibility; and
those claims upon her she had labored to fulfil conscientiously; but
else they had only precipitated the rupture of such tics as had given
sweetness to her life.

From the first, therefore, I had been aware, on this visit to Laxton,
that Lady Carbery had changed, and was changing. She had become
religious; so much I knew from my sister's letters. And, in fact, this
change had been due to her intercourse with my mother. But, in reality,
her premature disgust with the world would, at any rate, have made her
such; and, had any mode of monastic life existed for Protestants, I
believe that she would before this have entered it, supposing Lord
Carbery to have consented. People generally would have stated the case
most erroneously; they would have said that she was sinking into gloom
under religious influences; whereas the very contrary was the truth;
namely, that, having sunk into gloomy discontent with life, and its
miserable performances as contrasted with its promises, she sought
relief and support to her wounded feelings from religion.

But the change brought with it a difficult trial to myself. She
recoiled, by natural temperament and by refinement of taste, from all
modes of religious enthusiasm. Enthusiasm is a large word, and in many
cases I could not go along with her; but _canting_ of all descriptions
was odious to both of us alike. To cultivate religious knowledge in an
intellectual way, she very well understood that she must study
divinity. And she relied upon me for assisting her. Not that she made
the mistake of ascribing to me any knowledge on that subject; but I
could learn; and, whatsoever I _had_ learned, she knew, by experience,
that I could make abundantly plain to her understanding. Wherever I did
_not_ understand, I was far too sincere to dissemble that fact. Where I
_did_ understand, I could enable _her_ to understand.

On the subject of theology, it was not easy indeed for anybody, man or
boy, to be more ignorant than myself. My studies in that field had been
none at all. Nor was this any subject for wonder, or (considering my
age) for blame. In reality, to make theology into a captivating study
for the young, it must be translated into controversial theology. And
in what way could such a polemic interest be evoked except through
political partisanship? But such partisanship connects itself naturally
with the irritability of sectarianism, and but little with the majestic
repose of a church such as the Romish or the Anglican, founded upon the
broad basis of national majorities, and sheltered from danger, or the
sense of danger, by state protection. Dissenters stand upon another
footing. The Dissenter from the national church, whether in England or
in France, is reminded by his own distinguishing religious opinions of
the historic struggles through which those opinions have travelled. The
doctrines which give to his own sect a peculiar denomination are also
those which record its honorable political conflicts; so that his own
connection, through his religious brotherhood, with the civil history
of his country, furnishes a standing motive of pride for some
acquaintance more or less with divinity; since it is by deviating
painfully, conscientiously, and at some periods dangerously, from the
established divinity, that his fathers have achieved their station in
the great drama of the national evolution.

But, whilst I was ignorant of theology, as a direct and separate branch
of study, the points are so many at which theology inosculates with
philosophy, and with endless casual and random suggestions of the self-
prompted reason, that inevitably from that same moment in which I began
to find a motive for directing my thoughts to this new subject, I
wanted not something to say that might have perplexed an antagonist, or
(in default of such a vicious associate) that might have amused a
friend, more especially a friend so predisposed to a high estimate of
myself as Lady Carbery. Sometimes I did more than amuse her; I startled
her, and I even startled myself, with distinctions that to this hour
strike me as profoundly just, and as undeniably novel. Two out of many
I will here repeat; and with the more confidence, that in these two I
can be sure of repeating the exact thoughts; whereas, in very many
other cases, it would not be so certain that they might not have been
insensibly modified by cross-lights or disturbing shadows from
intervening speculations.

John the Baptist, like other earlier prophets, delivered a message
which, probably enough, he did not himself more than dimly understand,
and never in its full compass of meaning. Christ occupied another
station. Not only was he the original Interpreter, but he was himself
the Author--Founder, at once, and Finisher--of that great
transfiguration applied to ethics, which he and the Baptist alike
announced as forming the code for the new and revolutionary era now
opening its endless career. The human race was summoned to bring a
transfiguring sense and spirit of interpretation (_metanoia_) to a
transfigured ethics--an altered organ to an altered object. This is by
far the grandest miracle recorded in Scripture. No exhibition of blank
power--not the arresting of the earth's motion--not the calling back of
the dead unto life, can approach in grandeur to this miracle which we
all daily behold; namely, the inconceivable mystery of having written
and sculptured upon the tablets of man's heart a new code of moral
distinctions, all modifying--many reversing--the old ones. What would
have been thought of any prophet, if he should have promised to
transfigure the celestial mechanics; if he had said, I will create a
new pole-star, a new zodiac, and new laws of gravitation; briefly, I
will make new earth and new heavens? And yet a thousand times more
awful it was to undertake the writing of new laws upon the spiritual
conscience of man. _Metanoeite_ (was the cry from the wilderness),
wheel into a new centre your moral system; _geocentric_ has that
system been up to this hour--that is, having earth and the earthly for
its starting-point; henceforward make it _heliocentric_ (that is,
with the sun, or the heavenly for its principle of motion).

2. A second remark of mine was, perhaps, not more important, but it
was, on the whole, better calculated to startle the prevailing
preconceptions; for, as to the new system of morals introduced by
Christ, generally speaking, it is too dimly apprehended in its great
differential features to allow of its miraculous character being
adequately appreciated; one flagrant illustration of which is furnished
by our experience in Affghanistan, where some officers, wishing to
impress Akhbar Khan with the beauty of Christianity, very judiciously
repeated to him the Lord's Prayer and the Sermon on the Mount, by both
of which the Khan was profoundly affected, and often recurred to them;
but others, under the notion of conveying to him a more
_comprehensive_ view of the Scriptural ethics, repeated to him the
Ten Commandments; although, with the sole exception of the two first,
forbidding idolatry and Polytheism, there is no word in these which
could have displeased or surprised a Pagan, and therefore nothing
characteristic of Christianity. Meantime my second remark was
substantially this which follows: What is a religion? To Christians it
means, over and above a mode of worship, a dogmatic (that is, a
doctrinal) system; a great body of doctrinal truths, moral and
spiritual. But to the ancients (to the Greeks and Romans, for
instance), it meant nothing of the kind. A religion was simply a
_cultus_, a _thrćskeia_, a mode of ritual worship, in which
there might be two differences, namely: 1. As to the particular deity
who furnished the motive to the worship; 2. As to the ceremonial, or
mode of conducting the worship. But in no case was there so much as a
pretence of communicating any religious truths, far less any moral
truths. The obstinate error rooted in modern minds is, that, doubtless,
the moral instruction was bad, as being heathen; but that still it was
as good as heathen opportunities allowed it to be. No mistake can be
greater. Moral instruction had no existence even in the plan or
intention of the religious service. The Pagan priest or flamen never
dreamed of any function like that of _teaching_ as in any way
connected with his office. He no more undertook to teach morals than to
teach geography or cookery. He taught nothing. What he undertook was,
simply to _do_: namely, to present authoritatively (that is,
authorized and supported by some civil community, Corinth, or Athens,
or Rome, which he represented) the homage and gratitude of that
community to the particular deity adored. As to morals or just opinions
upon the relations to man of the several divinities, all this was
resigned to the teaching of nature; and for any polemic functions the
teaching was resigned to the professional philosophers--academic,
peripatetic, stoic, etc. By religion it was utterly ignored.

The reader must do me the favor to fix his attention upon the real
question at issue. What I say--what then I said to Lady Carbery--is
this: that, by failing to notice as a _differential_ feature of
Christianity this involution of a doctrinal part, we elevate Paganism
to a dignity which it never dreamed of. Thus, for instance, in the
Eleusinian mysteries, what was the main business transacted? I, for my
part, in harmony with my universal theory on this subject,--namely,
that there could be no doctrinal truth delivered in a Pagan religion,--
have always maintained that the only end and purpose of the mysteries
was a more solemn and impressive worship of a particular goddess.
Warburton, on the other hand, would insist upon it that some great
affirmative doctrines, interesting to man, such as the immortality of
the soul, a futurity of retribution, &c., might be here commemorated.
And now, nearly a hundred years after Warburton, what is the opinion of
scholars upon this point? Two of the latest and profoundest I will
cite:--1. Lobeck, in his "Aglaophamus," expressly repels all such
notions; 2. Otfried Mueller, in the twelfth chapter, twenty-fourth
section, of his "Introduction to a System of Mythology," says: "I have
here gone on the assumption which I consider unavoidable, that there
was no regular instruction, no dogmatical communication, connected with
the Grecian worship in general. _There could be nothing_ of the
kind introduced into the public service from the way in which it was
conducted, for the priest _did not address the people at all_."
These opinions, which exactly tallied with my own assertion to Lady
Carbery, that all religion amongst the Pagans resolved itself into a
mere system of ceremonial worship, a pompous and elaborate
_cultus_, were not brought forward in Germany until about ten or
twelve years ago; whereas, my doctrine was expressly insisted on in
1800; that is, forty years earlier than any of these German writers had
turned their thoughts in that direction.

Had I, then, really all that originality on this subject which for many
years I secretly claimed? Substantially I had, because this great
distinction between the modern (or Christian) idea of "a religion" and
the ancient (or Pagan) idea of "a religion," I had nowhere openly seen
expressed in words. To myself exclusively I was indebted for it.
Nevertheless, it is undeniable that this conception must have been long
ago germinating in the world, and perhaps bearing fruit. This is past
all denial, since, about thirteen or fourteen years ago, I read in some
journal (a French journal, I think) this statement: namely, that some
oriental people--Turks, according to my present impression, but it
might have been Arabs--make an old traditional distinction (so said the
French journal) between what they call "religions of the book" and all
other religions. The religions of the book, according to them, are
three, all equally founded upon written and producible documents,
namely: first, the Judaic system, resting upon the Pentateuch, or more
truly, I should imagine, upon the Law and the Prophets; secondly, the
Christian system, resting upon the Old and New Testaments; thirdly, the
Mahometan system, resting confessedly upon the Koran. The very meaning,
therefore, of styling these systems, by way of honorable distinction,
_religions of the book_, is, not that accidentally they had
written vouchers for their creed, whereas the others had only oral
vouchers, but that they severally offer to men's acceptance a large
body of philosophic truth, such as requires and presupposes a book.
Whereas the various religions contradistinguished from these three--
namely, the whole body of Pagan idolatries--are mere forms of adoration
addressed to many different divinities; and the brief reason why they
are essentially opposed to religions of the book is, not that they
_have_ not, but logically that they _cannot_ have, books or
documents, inasmuch as they have no truths to deliver. They do not
profess to teach anything whatsoever. What they profess, as their
justifying distinction, is, to adore a certain deity, or a certain
collective Pantheon, according to certain old authorized forms--
authorized, that is to say, by fixed, ancient, and oftentimes local
traditions.

What was the great practical inference from the new distinction which I
offered? It was this: that Christianity (which included Judaism as its
own germinal principle, and Islamism as its own adaptation to a
barbarous and imperfect civilization) carried along with itself its own
authentication; since, whilst other religions introduced men simply to
ceremonies and usages, which could furnish no aliment or material for
their intellect, Christianity provided an eternal _palćstra_ or
place of exercise for the human understanding vitalized by human
affections: for every problem whatever, interesting to the human
intellect, provided only that it bears a _moral_ aspect, immediately
passes into the field of religious speculation. Religion had thus
become the great organ of human culture. Lady Carbery advanced
half-way to meet me in these new views, finding my credentials as a
theologian in my earnestness and my sincerity. She herself was
painfully and sorrowfully in earnest. She had come at this early age of
seven or eight and twenty, to the most bitter sense of hollowness, and
(in a philosophic sense) of _treachery_ as under-lying all things
that stood round her; and she sought escape, if escape there were,
through religion. Religion was to be sought in the Bible. But was the
Bible intelligible at the first glance? Far from it. Search the
Scriptures, was the cry in Protestant lands amongst all people, however
much at war with each other. But I often told her that this was a vain
pretence, without some knowledge of Greek. Or perhaps not always and
absolutely a pretence; because, undoubtedly, it is true that oftentimes
mere ignorant simplicity may, by bringing into direct collision
passages that are reciprocally illustrative, restrain an error or
illuminate a truth. And a reason, which I have since given in print (a
reason additional to Bentley's), for neglecting the thirty thousand
various readings collected by the diligence of the New Testament
collators, applied also to this case, namely: That, first, the
transcendent nature, and, secondly, the _recurrent_ nature, of
Scriptural truths cause them to surmount verbal disturbances. A
doctrine, for instance, which is sowed broadcast over the Scriptures,
and recurs, on an average, three times in every chapter, cannot be
affected by the casual inaccuracy of a phrase, since the phrase is
continually varied. And, therefore, I would not deny the possibility of
an effectual searching by very unlearned persons. Our authorized
translators of the Bible in the Shakspearian age were not in any
exquisite sense learned men; they were very able men, and in a better
sense able than if they had been philologically profound scholars,
which at that time, from the imperfect culture of philology, they could
not easily have been; men they were whom religious feeling guided
correctly in choosing their expressions, and with whom the state of the
language in some respects cooperated, by furnishing a diction more
homely, fervent, and pathetic, than would now be available. For their
apostolic functions English was the language most in demand. But in
polemic or controversial cases Greek is indispensable. And of this Lady
Carbery was sufficiently convinced by my own demur on the word
_metanoia_. If I were right, how profoundly wrong must those have
been whom my new explanation superseded. She resolved, therefore,
immediately on my suggesting it, that she would learn Greek; or, at
least, that limited form of Greek which was required for the New
Testament. In the language of Terence, dictum factum--no sooner said
than done. On the very next morning we all rode in to Stamford, our
nearest town for such a purpose, and astounded the bookseller's
apprentice by ordering four copies of the Clarendon Press Greek
Testament, three copies of Parkhurst's Greek and English Lexicon, and
three copies of some grammar, but what I have now forgotten. The books
were to come down by the mail-coach without delay. Consequently, we
were soon at work. Lady Massey and my sister, not being sustained by
the same interest as Lady Carbery, eventually relaxed in their
attention. But Lady Carbery was quite in earnest, and very soon became
expert in the original language of the New Testament.

I wished much that she should have gone on to the study of Herodotus.
And I described to her the situation of the vivacious and mercurial
Athenian, in the early period of Pericles, as repeating in its main
features, for the great advantage of that Grecian Froissart, the
situation of Adam during his earliest hours in Paradise, himself being
the describer to the affable archangel. The same genial climate there
was; the same luxuriation of nature in her early prime; the same
ignorance of his own origin in the tenant of this lovely scenery; and
the same eager desire to learn it. The very truth, and
mere facts of history, reaching Herodotus through such a haze of remote
abstraction, and suffering a sort of refraction at each translation
from atmosphere to atmosphere, whilst continually the uninteresting
parts dropped away as the whole moved onwards, unavoidably assumed the
attractions of romance. And thus it has happened that the air of
marvellousness, which seems connected with the choice and preferences
of Herodotus, is in reality the natural gift of his position. Culling
from a field of many nations and many generations, reasonably he
preferred such narratives as, though possible enough, wore the coloring
of romance. Without any violation of the truth, the mere extent of his
field as to space and time gave him great advantages for the wild and
the marvellous. Meantime, this purpose of ours with regard to Herodotus
was defeated. Whilst we were making preparations for it, suddenly one
morning from his Limerick estate of Carass returned Lord Carbery. And,
by accident, his welcome was a rough one; for, happening to find Lady
Carbery in the breakfast-room, and naturally throwing his arm about her
neck to kiss her, "Ruffian," a monster of a Newfoundland dog,
singularly beautiful in his coloring, and almost as powerful as a
leopard, flew at him vindictively as at a stranger committing an
assault, and his mistress had great difficulty in calling him off. Lord
Carbery smiled a little at our Greek studies; and, in turn, made us
smile, who knew the original object of these studies, when he suggested
mildly that three or four books of the "Iliad" would have been as
easily mastered, and might have more fully rewarded our trouble. I
contented myself with replying (for I knew how little Lady Carbery
would have liked to plead the _religious_ motive to her husband),
that Parkhurst (and there was at that time no other Greek-
_English_ Lexicon) would not have been available for Homer;
neither, it is true, would he have been available for Herodotus. But,
considering the simplicity and uniformity of style in both these
authors, I had formed a plan (not very hard of execution) for
interleaving Parkhurst with such additional words as might have been
easily mustered from the special dictionaries (Grćco-Latin) dedicated
separately to the service of the historian and of the poet. I do not
believe that more than fifteen hundred _extra_ words would have
been required; and these, entered at the rate of twenty per hour, would
have occupied only ten days, for seven and a half hours each. However,
from one cause or other, this plan was never brought to bear. The
preliminary labor upon the lexicon always enforced a delay; and any
delay, in such case, makes an opening for the irruption of a thousand
unforeseen hindrances, that finally cause the whole plan to droop
insensibly. The time came at last for leaving Laxton, and I did not see
Lady Carbery again for nearly an entire year.

In passing through the park-gates of Laxton, on my departure northward,
powerfully, and as if "with the might of waters," my mind turned round
to contemplate that strange enlargement of my experience which had
happened to me within the last three months. I had seen, and become
familiarly acquainted with, a young man, who had in a manner died to
every object around him, had died an intellectual death, and suddenly
had been called back to life and real happiness--had been, in effect,
raised from the dead--by the accident of meeting a congenial female
companion. But, secondly, that very lady from whose lips I first heard
this remarkable case of blight and restoration, had herself passed
through an equal though not a similar blight, and was now seeking
earnestly, though with what success I could never estimate, some
similar restoration to some new mode of hopeful existence, through
intercourse with religious philosophy. What vast revolutions (vast for
the individual) within how narrow a circle! What blindness to
approaching catastrophes, in the midst of what nearness to the light!
And for myself, whom accident had made the silent observer of these
changes, was it not likely enough that I also was rushing forward to
court and woo some frantic mode of evading an endurance that by
patience might have been borne, or by thoughtfulness might have been
disarmed? Misgivingly I went forwards, feeling forever that, through
clouds of thick darkness, I was continually nearing a danger, or was
myself perhaps wilfully provoking a trial, before which my
constitutional despondency would cause me to lie down without a
struggle.

To teach is to learn: according to an old experience, it is the very
best mode of learning--the surest, and the shortest. And hence,
perhaps, it may be, that in the middle ages by the monkish word
_scholaris_ was meant indifferently he that learned and he that
taught. Never in any equal number of months had my understanding so
much expanded as during this visit to Laxton. The incessant demand made
upon me by Lady Carbery for solutions of the many difficulties
besetting the study of divinity and the Greek Testament, or for such
approximations to solutions as my resources would furnish, forced me
into a preternatural tension of all the faculties applicable to that
purpose. Lady Carbery insisted upon calling me her "Admirable
Crichton;" and it was in vain that I demurred to this honorary title
upon two grounds: first, as being one towards which I had no natural
aptitudes or predisposing advantages; secondly (which made her stare),
as carrying with it no real or enviable distinction. The splendor
supposed to be connected with the attainments of Crichton I protested
against, as altogether imaginary. How far that person really had the
accomplishments ascribed to him, I waived as a question not worth
investigating. My objection commenced at an earlier point: real or not
real, the accomplishments were, as I insisted, vulgar and trivial.
Vulgar, that is, when put forward as exponents or adequate expressions
of intellectual grandeur. The whole rested on a misconception; the
limitary idea of knowledge was confounded with the infinite idea of
power. To have a quickness in copying or mimicking other men, and in
learning to do dexterously what _they_ did clumsily,--ostentatiously
to keep glittering before men's eyes a thaumaturgic versatility
such as that of a rope-dancer, or of an Indian juggler, in petty
accomplishments,--was a mode of the very vulgarest ambition: one
effort of productive power,--a little book, for instance, which should
impress or should agitate several successive generations of men, even
though far below the higher efforts of human creative art--as, for
example, the "De Imitatione Christi," or "The Pilgrim's Progress," or"
Robinson Crusoe," or "The Vicar of Wakefield,"--was worth any
conceivable amount of attainments when rated as an evidence of anything
that could justly denominate a man "admirable." One felicitous ballad
of forty lines might have enthroned Crichton as really admirable,
whilst the pretensions actually put forward on his behalf simply
install him as a cleverish or dexterous ape. However, as Lady Carbery
did not forego her purpose of causing me to shine under every angle, it
would have been ungrateful in me to refuse my cooperation with her
plans, however little they might wear a face of promise. Accordingly I
surrendered myself for two hours daily to the lessons in horsemanship
of a principal groom who ranked as a first-rate rough-rider; and I
gathered manifold experiences amongst the horses--so different from the
wild, hard-mouthed horses at Westport, that were often vicious, and
sometimes trained to vice. Here, though spirited, the horses were
pretty generally gentle, and all had been regularly broke. My education
was not entirely neglected even as regarded sportsmanship; that great
branch of philosophy being confided to one of the keepers, who was very
attentive to me, in deference to the interest in myself expressed by
his idolized mistress, but otherwise regarded me probably as an object
of mysterious curiosity rather than of sublunary hope.

Equally, in fact, as regarded my physics and my metaphysics,--in short,
upon all lines of advance that interested my ambition,--I was going
rapidly ahead. And, speaking seriously, in what regarded my
intellectual expansion, never before or since had I been so distinctly
made aware of it. No longer did it seem to move upon the hour-hand,
whose advance, though certain, is yet a pure matter of inference, but
upon the seconds'-hand, which _visibly_ comes on at a trotting
pace. Everything prospered, except my own present happiness, and the
possibility of any happiness for some years to come. About two months
after leaving Laxton, my fate in the worst shape I had anticipated was
solemnly and definitively settled. My guardians agreed that the most
prudent course, with a view to my pecuniary interests, was to place me
at the Manchester Grammar School; not with a view to further
improvement in my classical knowledge, though the head-master was a
sound scholar, but simply with a view to one of the school
_exhibitions_. Amongst the countless establishments, scattered all over
England by the noble munificence of English men and English women in
past generations, for connecting the provincial towns with the two
royal universities of the land, this Manchester school was one; in
addition to other great local advantages (namely, _inter alia_, a
fine old library and an ecclesiastical foundation, which in this
present generation has furnished the materials for a bishopric of
Manchester, with its deanery and chapter), this noble foundation
secured a number of exhibitions at Brasenose College, Oxford, to those
pupils of the school who should study at Manchester for three
consecutive years. The pecuniary amount of these exhibitions has since
then increased considerably through the accumulation of funds, which
the commercial character of that great city had caused to be neglected.
At that time, I believe each exhibition yielded about forty guineas a-
year, and was legally tenable for seven successive years. Now, to me
this would have offered a most seasonable advantage, had it been
resorted to some two years earlier. My small patrimonial inheritance
gave to me, as it did to each of my four brothers, exactly one hundred
and fifty pounds a-year: and to each of my sisters exactly one hundred
pounds a-year. The Manchester exhibition of forty guineas a-year would
have raised this income for seven years to a sum close upon two hundred
pounds a-year. But at present I was half-way on the road to the
completion of my sixteenth year. Commencing my period of pupilage from
that time, I should not have finished it until I had travelled half-way
through my nineteenth year. And the specific evil that already weighed
upon me with a sickening oppression was the premature expansion of my
mind; and, as a foremost consequence, intolerance of boyish society. I
ought to have entered upon my _triennium_ of school-boy servitude
at the age of thirteen. As things were,--a delay with which I had
nothing to do myself,--this and the native character of my mind had
thrown the whole arrangement awry. For the better half of the three
years I endured it patiently. But it had at length begun to eat more
corrosively into my peace of mind than ever I had anticipated. The
head-master was substantially superannuated for the duties of his
place. Not that intellectually he showed any symptoms of decay: but in
the spirits and physical energies requisite for his duties he did: not
so much age, as disease, it was that incapacitated him. In the course
of a long day, beginning at seven A. M. and stretching down to five P.
M., he succeeded in reaching the further end of his duties. But how?
Simply by consolidating pretty nearly into one continuous scene of
labor the entire ten hours. The full hour of relaxation which the
traditions of this ancient school and the by-laws had consecrated to
breakfast was narrowed into ten, or even seven minutes. The two hours'
interval, in like manner prescribed by the old usages from twelve to
two P. M., was pared down to forty minutes, or less. In this way he
walked conscientiously through the services of the day, fulfilling to
the letter every section the minutest of the traditional rubric. But he
purchased this consummation at the price of all comfort to himself:
and, having done _that_, he felt himself the more entitled to
neglect the comfort of others. The case was singular: he neither showed
any indulgence to himself more than to others (which, however, could do
nothing towards indemnifying others for the severe confinement which
his physical decay inflicted upon them--a point wholly forgotten by
him); nor, secondly, in thus tenaciously holding on to his place did he
(I am satisfied) govern himself by any mercenary thought or wish, but
simply by an austere sense of duty. He discharged his public functions
with constant fidelity, and with superfluity of learning; and felt,
perhaps not unreasonably, that possibly the same learning united with
the same zeal might not revolve as a matter of course in the event of
his resigning the place. I hide from myself no part of the honorable
motives which might (and probably _did_) exclusively govern him in
adhering to the place. But not by one atom the less did the grievous
results of his inability to grapple with his duties weigh upon all
within his sphere, and upon myself, by cutting up the time available
for exercise, most ruinously.

Precisely at the worst crisis of this intolerable darkness (for such,
without exaggeration, it was in its effects upon my spirits) arose, and
for five or six months steadily continued, a consolation of that nature
which hardly in dreams I could have anticipated. For even in dreams
would it have seemed reasonable, or natural, that Laxton, with its
entire society, should transfer itself to Manchester? Some mighty
caliph, or lamp-bearing Aladdin, might have worked such marvels: but
else who, or by what machinery? Nevertheless, without either caliph or
Aladdin, and by the most natural of mere human agencies, this change
was suddenly accomplished.

Mr. White, whom I have already had occasion to mention elsewhere, was
in those days the most eminent surgeon by much in the north of England.
He had by one whole generation run before the phrenologists and
craniologists,--having already measured innumerable skulls amongst the
omnigenous seafaring population of Liverpool, illustrating all the
races of men,--and was in society a most urbane and pleasant companion.
On my mother's suggestion, he had been summoned to Laxton, in the hope
that he might mitigate the torments of Mrs. Schreiber's malady. If I am
right in supposing that to have been cancer, I presume that he could
not have added much to the prescriptions of the local doctor. And yet,
on the other hand, it is a fact--so slowly did new views travel in
those days, when scientific journals were few, and roads were heavy--
that ten years later than this period I knew a case, namely, the case
of a butcher's wife in Somersetshire who had never enjoyed the benefit
of hemlock in relieving the pangs of a cancerous complaint, until an
accident brought Mr. Hey, son to the celebrated Hey of Leeds, into the
poor woman's neighborhood.

What might be the quality or the extent of that relief with which Mr.
White was able to crown the expectations of poor Mrs. Schreiber, I do
not know; but that the relief could not have been imaginary is certain,
for he was earnestly invited to repeat his visits, costly as
unavoidably they were. Mrs. Schreiber did not reside at Laxton.
Tenderly as she loved Lady Carbery, it did not seem consistent with her
dignity that she should take a station that might have been grossly
misinterpreted; and accordingly she bought or hired a miniature kind of
villa, called _Tixover_, distant about four miles from Laxton. A
residence in such a house, so sad and silent at this period of
affliction for its mistress, would have offered too cheerless a life to
Mr. White. He took up his abode, therefore, at Laxton during his
earliest visit; and this happened to coincide with that particular
visit of my own during which I was initiating Lady Carbery into the
mysteries of New Testament Greek. Already as an infant I had known Mr.
White; but now, when daily riding over to Tixover in company, and daily
meeting at breakfast and dinner, we became intimate. Greatly I profited
by this intimacy; and some part of my pleasure in the Laxton plan of
migration to Manchester was drawn from the prospect of renewing it.
Such a migration was suggested by Mr. White himself; and fortunately he
_could_ suggest it without even the appearance of any mercenary
views. His interest lay the other way. The large special retainer,
which it was felt but reasonable to pay him under circumstances so
peculiar, naturally disturbed Mr. White; whilst the benefits of visits
so discontinuous became more and more doubtful. He proposed it,
therefore, as a measure of prudence, that Mrs. Schreiber should take up
her abode in Manchester. This counsel was adopted; and the entire
Laxton party in one week struck their Northamptonshire tents, dived, as
it were, into momentary darkness, by a loitering journey of stages,
short and few, out of consideration for the invalid, and rose again in
the gloomy streets of Manchester.

Gloomy they were at that time--mud below, smoke above--for no torch of
improvement had yet explored the ancient habitations of this Lancashire
capital. Elsewhere I have expressed the inexhaustible admiration which
I cherish for the _moral_ qualities, the unrivalled energy and
perseverance, of that native Lancashire population, as yet not much
alloyed with Celtic adulteration. My feelings towards them are the same
as were eloquently and impressively avowed by the late eminent Dr.
Cooke Taylor, after an _official_ inquiry into their situation.
But in those days the Manchester people realized the aspiration of the
noble Scythian; not the place it was that glorified _them_, but
they that glorified the place. No great city (which technically it then
was not, but simply a town or large village) could present so repulsive
an exterior as the Manchester of that day. Lodgings of _any_ sort
could with difficulty be obtained, and at last only by breaking up the
party. The poor suffering lady, with her two friends, Lady Carbery and
my mother, hired one house, Lord and Lady Massey another, and two
others were occupied by attendants--all the servants, except one
lady's-maid, being every night separated by a quarter of a mile from
their mistresses. To me, however, all these discomforts were scarcely
apparent in the prodigious revolution for the better which was now
impressed upon the tenor of my daily life. I lived in the house of the
head-master; but every night I had leave to adjourn for four or five
hours to the drawing-room of Lady Carbery. Her anxiety about Mrs.
Schreiber would not allow of her going abroad into society, unless upon
the rarest occasions. And I, on my part, was too happy in her
conversation--so bold, so novel, and so earnest--voluntarily to have
missed any one hour of it.

Here, by the way, let me mention that on this occasion arose a case of
pretended "_tuft-hunting_," which I, who stood by a silent
observer, could not but feel to involve a malicious calumny. Naturally
it happened that coroneted carriages, superb horses, and numerous
servants, in a town so unostentatious and homely as the Manchester of
that day, drew the public gaze, and effectually advertised the visit of
the Laxton ladies. Respect for the motive which had prompted this visit
coöperated with admiration for the distinguished personal qualities of
Lady Carbery, to draw upon her from several leading families in the
town such little services and attentions as pass naturally, under a
spontaneous law of courtesy, between those who are at home and those
who suffer under the disadvantages of _strangership_. The Manchester
people, who made friendly advances to Lady Carbery, did so, I am
persuaded, with no ulterior objects whatsoever of pressing into
the circle of an aristocratic person; neither did Lady Carbery herself
interpret their attentions in any such ungenerous spirit, but accepted
them cordially, as those expressions of disinterested goodness which I
am persuaded that in reality they were. Amongst the families that were
thus attentive to her, in throwing open for her use various local
advantages of baths, libraries, picture-galleries, etc., were the wife
and daughters of Mr. White himself. Now, one of these daughters was
herself the wife of a baronet, Sir Richard Clayton, who had honorably
distinguished himself in literature by translating and _improving_
the work of Tenhove the Dutchman (or Belgian?) upon the house of the
_De' Medici_--a work which Mr. Roscoe considered "the most engaging
work that has, perhaps, ever appeared on a subject of literary
history." Introduced as Lady Clayton had been amongst the elite of our
aristocracy, it could not be supposed that she would be at all
solicitous about an introduction to the wife of an Irish nobleman,
simply _as_ such, and apart from her personal endowments. Those
endowments, it is true,--namely, the beauty and the talents of Lady
Carbery, made known in Manchester through Mr. White's report of them,
and combined with the knowledge of her generous devotion to her dying
friend, secluding her steadily from all society through a period of
very many months,--did, and reasonably might, interest many Manchester
people on her behalf. In all this there was nothing to be ashamed of;
and, judging from what personally I witnessed, this seems to have been
the true nature and extent of the "tuft-hunting;" and I have noticed it
at all simply because there is a habit almost national growing up
amongst us of imputing to each other some mode of unmanly prostration
before the aristocracy, but with as little foundation for the charge
generally, I believe, as I am satisfied there was in this particular
instance.

Mr. White possessed a museum--formed chiefly by himself, and
originally, perhaps, directed simply to professional objects, such as
would have little chance for engaging the attention of females. But
surgeons and speculative physicians, beyond all other classes of
intellectual men, cultivate the most enlarged and liberal curiosity; so
that Mr. White's museum furnished attractions to an unusually large
variety of tastes. I had myself already seen it; and it struck me that
Mr. White would be gratified if Lady Carbery would herself ask to see
it; which accordingly she did; and thus at once removed the painful
feeling that he might be extorting from her an expression of interest
in his collection which she did not really feel.

Amongst the objects which gave a scientific interest to the collection,
naturally I have forgotten one and all--first, midst, and last; for
this is one of the cases in which we all felicitate ourselves upon the
art and gift of forgetting; that art which the great Athenian noticed as amongst the
_desiderata_ of human life--that gift which, if in some rare cases
it belongs only to the regal prerogatives of the grave, fortunately in
many thousands of other cases is accorded by the treachery of a human
brain. Heavens! what a curse it were, if every chaos, which is stamped
upon the mind by fairs such as that London fair of St. Bartholomew in
years long past, or by the records of battles and skirmishes through
the monotonous pages of history, or by the catalogues of libraries
stretching over a dozen measured miles, could not be erased, but
arrayed itself in endless files incapable of obliteration, as often as
the eyes of our human memory happened to throw back their gaze in that
direction! Heaven be praised, I have forgotten everything; all the
earthly trophies of skill or curious research; even the ćrolithes, that
might possibly _not_ be earthly, but presents from some superior
planet. Nothing survives, except the _humanities_ of the collection;
and amongst these, two only I will molest the reader by noticing.
One of the two was a _mummy;_ the other was a _skeleton_. I,
that had previously seen the museum, warned Lady Carbery of both; but
much it mortified us that only the skeleton was shown. Perhaps
the mummy was too closely connected with the personal history
of Mr. White for exhibition to strangers; it was that of a lady
who had been attended medically for some years by Mr. White, and had
owed much alleviation of her sufferings to his inventive skill. She
had, therefore, felt herself called upon to memorialize her gratitude
by a very large bequest--not less (I have heard) than twenty-five
thousand pounds; but with this condition annexed to the gift--that she
should be embalmed as perfectly as the resources in that art of London
and Paris could accomplish, and that once a year Mr. White, accompanied
by two witnesses of credit, should withdraw the veil from her face. The
lady was placed in a common English clock-case, having the usual glass
face; but a veil of white velvet obscured from all profane eyes the
silent features behind. The clock I had myself seen, when a child, and
had gazed upon it with inexpressible awe. But, naturally, on my report
of the case, the whole of our party were devoured by a curiosity to see
the departed fair one. Had Mr. White, indeed, furnished us with the key
of the museum, leaving us to our own discretion, but restricting us
only (like a cruel Bluebeard) from looking into any ante-room, great is
my fear that the perfidious question would have arisen amongst us--what
o'clock it was? and all possible ante-rooms would have given way to the
just fury of our passions. I submitted to Lady Carbery, as a liberty
which might be excused by the torrid extremity of our thirst after
knowledge, that she (as our leader) should throw out some angling
question moving in the line of our desires; upon which hint Mr. White,
if he had any touch of indulgence to human infirmity--unless Mount
Caucasus were his mother, and a she-wolf his nurse--would surely
relent, and act as his conscience must suggest. But Lady Carbery
reminded me of the three Calendars in the "Arabian Nights," and argued
that, as the ladies of Bagdad were justified in calling upon a body of
porters to kick those gentlemen into the street, being people who had
abused the indulgences of hospitality, much more might Mr. White do so
with us; for the Calendars were the children of kings (Shahzades),
which we were not; and had found their curiosity far more furiously
irritated; in fact, Zobeide had no right to trifle with any man's
curiosity in that ferocious extent; and a counter right arose, as any
chancery of human nature would have ruled, to demand a solution of what
had been so maliciously arranged towards an anguish of insupportable
temptation. Thus, however, it happened that the mummy, who left such
valuable legacies, and founded such bilious fevers of curiosity, was
not seen by us; nor even the miserable clock-case.

The mummy, therefore, was not seen; but the skeleton was. Who was he?
It is not every day that one makes the acquaintance of a skeleton; and
with regard to such a thing--thing, shall one say, or person?--there is
a favorable presumption from beforehand; which is this: As he is of no
use, neither profitable nor ornamental to any person whatever,
absolutely _de trop_ in good society, what but distinguished merit
of some kind or other could induce any man to interfere with that
gravitating tendency that by an eternal _nisus_ is pulling him
below ground? Lodgings are dear in England. True it is that, according
to the vile usage on the continent, one room serves a skeleton for bed-
room and sitting-room; neither is his expense heavy, as regards wax-
lights, fire, or "bif-steck." But still, even a skeleton is chargeable;
and, if any dispute should arise about his maintenance, the parish will
do nothing. Mr. White's skeleton, therefore, being costly, was
presumably meritorious, before we had seen him or heard a word in his
behalf. It was, in fact, the skeleton of an eminent robber, or perhaps
of a murderer. But I, for my part, reserved a faint right of suspense.
And as to the profession of robber in those days exercised on the roads
of England, it was a liberal profession, which required more
accomplishments than either the bar or the pulpit: from the beginning
it presumed a most bountiful endowment of heroic qualifications--
strength, health, agility, and exquisite horsemanship, intrepidity of
the first order, presence of mind, courtesy, and a general
ambidexterity of powers for facing all accidents, and for turning to a
good account all unlooked-for contingencies. The finest men in England,
physically speaking, throughout the eighteenth century, the very
noblest specimens of man considered as an animal, were beyond a doubt
the mounted robbers who cultivated their profession on the great
leading roads, namely, on the road from London to York (technically
known as "the great north road"); on the road west to Bath, and thence
to Exeter and Plymouth; north-westwards from London to Oxford, and
thence to Chester; eastwards to Tunbridge; southwards by east to Dover;
then inclining westwards to Portsmouth; more so still, through
Salisbury to Dorsetshire and Wilts. These great roads were farmed out
as so many Roman provinces amongst pro-consuls. Yes, but with a
difference, you will say, in respect of moral principles. Certainly
with a difference; for the English highwayman had a sort of conscience
for gala-days, which could not often be said of the Roman governor or
procurator. At this moment we see that the opening for the forger of
bank-notes is brilliant; but practically it languishes, as being too
brilliant; it demands an array of talent for engraving, etc., which,
wherever it exists, is sufficient to carry a man forward upon
principles reputed honorable. Why, then, should _he_ court danger
and disreputability? But in that century the special talents which led
to distinction upon the high road had oftentimes no career open to them
elsewhere. The mounted robber on the highways of England, in an age
when all gentlemen travelled with fire-arms, lived in an element of
danger and adventurous gallantry; which, even from those who could
least allow him any portion of their esteem, extorted sometimes a good
deal of their unwilling admiration. By the necessities of the case, he
brought into his perilous profession some brilliant qualities--
intrepidity, address, promptitude of decision; and, if to these he
added courtesy, and a spirit (native or adopted) of forbearing
generosity, he seemed almost a man that merited public encouragement;
since very plausibly it might be argued that his profession was sure to
exist; that, if he were removed, a successor would inevitably arise,
and that successor might or might _not_ carry the same liberal and
humanizing temper into his practice. The man whose skeleton was now
before us had ranked amongst the most chivalrous of his order, and was
regarded by some people as vindicating the national honor in a point
where not very long before it had suffered a transient eclipse. In the
preceding generation, it had been felt as throwing a shade of disgrace
over the public honor, that the championship of England upon the high
road fell for a time into French hands; upon French prowess rested the
burden of English honor, or, in Gallic phrase, of English _glory_.
Claude Duval, a French man of undeniable courage, handsome, and noted
for his chivalrous devotion to women, had been honored, on his
condemnation to the gallows, by the tears of many ladies who attended
his trial, and by their sympathizing visits during his imprisonment.
But the robber represented by the skeleton in Mr. White's museum (whom
let us call X, since his true name has perished) added to the same
heroic qualities a person far more superb. Still it was a dreadful
drawback from his pretensions, if he had really practised as a
murderer. Upon what ground did that suspicion arise? In candor (for
candor is due even to a skeleton) it ought to be mentioned that the
charge, if it amounted to so much, arose with a lady from some part of
Cheshire--the district of Knutsford, I believe;--but, wherever it was,
in the same district, during the latter part of his career, had resided
our X. At first he was not suspected even as a robber--as yet not so
much as suspected of being suspicious; in a simple rustic neighborhood,
amongst good-natured peasants, for a long time he was regarded with
simple curiosity, rather than suspicion; and even the curiosity pointed
to his horse more than to himself. The robber had made himself popular
amongst the kind-hearted rustics by his general courtesy. Courtesy and
the spirit of neighborliness go a great way amongst country people; and
the worst construction of the case was, that he might be an embarrassed
gentleman from Manchester or Liverpool, hiding himself from his
creditors, who are notoriously a very immoral class of people. At
length, however, a violent suspicion broke loose against him; for it
was ascertained that on certain nights, when, perhaps, he had
_extra_ motives for concealing the fact of having been abroad, he
drew woollen stockings over his horse's feet, with the purpose of
deadening the sound in riding up a brick-paved entry, common to his own
stable and that of a respectable neighbor. Thus far there was a
reasonable foundation laid for suspicion; but suspicion of what?
Because a man attends to the darning of his horse's stockings, why must
he be meditating murder? The fact is--and known from the very first to
a select party of amateurs--that X, our superb-looking skeleton, did,
about three o'clock on a rainy Wednesday morning, in the dead of
winter, ride silently out of Knutsford; and about forty-eight hours
afterwards, on a rainy Friday, silently and softly did that same superb
blood-horse, carrying that same blood-man, namely, our friend the
superb skeleton, pace up the quiet brick entry, in a neat pair of
socks, on his return.

During that interval of forty-eight hours, an atrocious murder was
committed in the ancient city of Bristol. By whom? That question is to
this day unanswered. The scene of it was a house on the west side of
the College Green, which is in fact that same quadrangle planted with
trees, and having on its southern side the Bristol Cathedral, up and
down which, early in the reign of George III., Chatterton walked in
jubilant spirits with fair young women of Bristol; up and down which,
some thirty years later, Robert Southey and S. T. C. walked with young
Bristol belles from a later generation. The subjects of the murder were
an elderly lady bearing some such name as Rusborough, and her female
servant. Mystery there was none as to the motive of the murder--
manifestly it was a hoard of money that had attracted the assassin; but
there was great perplexity as to the agent or agents concerned in the
atrocious act, and as to the mode by which an entrance, under the known
precautions of the lady, could have been effected. Because a thorough-
bred horse could easily have accomplished the distance to and fro (say
three hundred miles) within the forty-eight hours, and because the two
extreme dates of this forty-eight hours' absence tallied with the
requisitions of the Bristol tragedy, it did not follow that X must have
had a hand in it. And yet, had these coincidences _then_ been
observed, they would certainly--now that strong suspicions had been
directed to the man from the extraordinary character of his nocturnal
precautions--not have passed without investigation. But the remoteness
of Bristol, and the rarity of newspapers in those days, caused these
indications to pass unnoticed. Bristol knew of no such Knutsford
highwayman--Knutsford knew of no such Bristol murder. It is singular
enough that these earlier grounds of suspicion against X were not
viewed as such by anybody, until they came to be combined with another
and final ground. Then the presumptions seemed conclusive. But, by that
time, X himself had been executed for a robbery; had been manufactured
into a skeleton by the famous surgeon, Cruickshank, assisted by Mr.
White and other pupils. All interest in the case had subsided in
Knutsford, that could now have cleared up the case satisfactorily; and
thus it happened that to this day the riddle, which was read pretty
decisively in a northern county, still remains a riddle in the south.
When I saw the College Green house in 1809-10, it was apparently empty,
and, as I was told, had always been empty since the murder: forty years
had not cicatrized the bloody remembrance; and, to this day, perhaps,
it remains amongst the gloomy traditions of Bristol.

But whether the Bristol house has or has not shaken off that odor of
blood which offended the nostrils of tenants, it is, I believe, certain
that the city annals have not shaken off the mystery: which yet to
certain people in Knutsford, as I have said, and to us the spectators
of the skeleton, immediately upon hearing one damning fact from the
lips of Mr. White, seemed to melt away and evaporate as convincingly as
if we had heard the explanation issuing in the terms of a confession
from the mouth of the skeleton itself. What, then, _was_ the fact?
With pain, and reluctantly, we felt its force, as we looked at the
royal skeleton, and reflected on the many evidences which he had given
of courage, and perhaps of other noble qualities. The ugly fact was
this: In a few weeks after the College Green tragedy, Knutsford, and
the whole neighborhood as far as Warrington (the half-way town between
Liverpool and Manchester), were deluged with gold and silver coins,
moidores, and dollars, from the Spanish mint of Mexico, etc. These,
during the frequent scarcities of English silver currency, were
notoriously current in England. Now, it is an unhappy fact, and
subsequently became known to the Bristol and London police, that a
considerable part of poor Mrs. Rusborough's treasure lay in such coins,
gold and silver, from the Spanish colonial mints.

Lady Carbery at this period made an effort to teach me Hebrew, by way
of repaying in _kind_ my pains in teaching Greek to _her_. Where,
and upon what motive, she had herself begun to learn Hebrew, I
forget: but in Manchester she had resumed this study with energy on a
casual impulse derived from a certain Dr. Bailey, a clergyman of this
city, who had published a Hebrew Grammar. The doctor was the most
unworldly and guileless of men. Amongst his orthodox brethren he was
reputed a "Methodist;" and not without reason; for some of his Low-
Church views he pushed into practical extravagances that looked like
fanaticism, or even like insanity. Lady Carbery wished naturally to
testify her gratitude for his services by various splendid presents:
but nothing would the good doctor accept, unless it assumed a shape
that might be available for the service of the paupers amongst his
congregation. The Hebrew studies, however, notwithstanding the personal
assistance which we drew from the kindness of Dr. Bailey, languished.
For this there were several reasons; but it was enough that the
systematic vagueness in the pronunciation of this, as of the other
Oriental languages, disgusted both of us. A word which could not be
pronounced with any certainty, was not in a true sense possessed. Let
it be understood, however, that it was not the correct and original
pronunciation that we cared for--_that_ has perished probably
beyond recall, even in the case of Greek, in spite of the Asiatic and
the Insular Greeks--what we demanded in vain was any pronunciation
whatever that should be articulate, apprehensible, and intercommunicable,
such as might differentiate the words: whereas a system of mere vowels
too inadequately strengthened by consonants, seemed to leave all words
pretty nearly alike. One day, in a pause of languor amongst these arid
Hebrew studies, I read to her, with a beating heart, "The Ancient
Mariner." It had been first published in 1798; and, about this time
(1801), was re-published in the first _two_-volume edition of "The
Lyrical Ballads." Well I knew Lady Carbery's constitutional inaptitude
for poetry; and not for the world would I have sought sympathy from her
or from anybody else upon that part of the L. B. which belonged to
Wordsworth. But I fancied that the wildness of this tale, and the triple
majesties of Solitude, of Mist, and of the Ancient Unknown Sea, might
have won her into relenting; and, in fact, she listened with gravity
and deep attention. But, on reviewing afterwards in conversation such
passages as she happened to remember, she laughed at the finest parts,
and shocked me by calling the mariner himself "an old quiz;" protesting
that the latter part of his homily to the wedding guest clearly pointed
him out as the very man meant by Providence for a stipendiary curate to
the good Dr. Bailey in his over-crowded church. With an albatross perched on his
shoulder, and who might be introduced to the congregation as the immediate
organ of his conversion, and supported by the droning of a bassoon, she
represented the mariner lecturing to advantage in English; the doctor
overhead in the pulpit enforcing it in Hebrew. Angry I was, though
forced to laugh. But of what use is anger or argument in a duel with
female criticism? Our ponderous masculine wits are no match for the
mercurial fancy of women. Once, however, I had a triumph: to my great
surprise, one day, she suddenly repeated by heart, to Dr. Bailey, the
beautiful passage--

asking what he thought of _that?_ As it happened, the simple,
childlike doctor had more sensibility than herself; for, though he had
never in his whole homely life read more of poetry than he had drunk of
Tokay or Constantia,--in fact, had scarcely heard tell of any poetry
but Watts' Hymns,--he seemed petrified: and at last, with a deep sigh,
as if recovering from the spasms of a new birth, said, "I never heard
anything so beautiful in my whole life."

During the long stay of the Laxton party in Manchester, occurred a
Christmas; and at Christmas--that is, at the approach of this great
Christian festival, so properly substituted in England for the Pagan
festival of January and the New Year--there was, according to ancient
usage, on the breaking up for the holidays, at the Grammar School, a
solemn celebration of the season by public speeches. Among the six
speakers, I, of course (as one of the three boys who composed the head
class), held a distinguished place; and it followed, also, as a matter
of course, that all my friends congregated on this occasion to do me
honor. What I had to recite was a copy of Latin verses (Alcaics) on the
recent conquest of Malta. _Melite Britannis Subacta_--this was the
title of my worshipful nonsense. The whole strength of the Laxton party
had mustered on this occasion. Lady Carbery made a point of bringing in
her party every creature whom she could influence. And, probably, there
were in that crowded audience many old Manchester friends of my father,
loving his memory, and thinking to honor it by kindness to his son.
Furious, at any rate, was the applause which greeted me: furious was my
own disgust. Frantic were the clamors as I concluded my nonsense.
Frantic was my inner sense of shame at the childish exhibition to
which, unavoidably, I was making myself a party. Lady Carbery had, at
first, directed towards me occasional glances, expressing a comic
sympathy with the thoughts which she supposed to be occupying my mind.
But these glances ceased; and I was recalled by the gloomy sadness in
her altered countenance to some sense of my own extravagant and
disproportionate frenzy on this occasion: from the indulgent kindness
with which she honored me, her countenance on this occasion became a
mirror to my own. At night she assured me, when talking over the case,
that she had never witnessed an expression of such settled misery, and
also (so she fancied) of misanthropy, as that which darkened my
countenance in those moments of apparent public triumph, no matter how
trivial the occasion, and amidst an uproar of friendly felicitation. I
look back to that state of mind as almost a criminal reproach to
myself, if it were not for the facts of the case. But, in excuse for
myself, this fact, above all others, ought to be mentioned--that, over
and above the killing oppression to my too sensitive system of the
monotonous school tasks, and the ruinous want of exercise, I had fallen
under medical advice the most misleading that it is possible to
imagine. The physician and the surgeon of my family were men too
eminent, it seemed to me, and, consequently, with time too notoriously
bearing a high pecuniary value, for any school-boy to detain them with
complaints. Under these circumstances, I threw myself for aid, in a
case so simple that any clever boy in a druggist's shop would have
known how to treat it, upon the advice of an old, old apothecary, who
had full authority from my guardians to run up a most furious account
against me for medicine. This being the regular mode of payment,
inevitably, and unconsciously, he was biased to a mode of treatment;
namely, by drastic medicines varied without end, which fearfully
exasperated the complaint. This complaint, as I now know, was the
simplest possible derangement of the liver, a torpor in its action that
might have been put to rights in three days. In fact, one week's
pedestrian travelling amongst the Caernarvonshire mountains effected a
revolution in my health such as left me nothing to complain of.

An odd thing happened by the merest accident. I, when my Alcaics had
run down their foolish larum, instead of resuming my official place as
one of the trinity who composed the head class, took a seat by the side
of Lady Carbery. On the other side of her was seated a stranger: and
this stranger, whom mere chance had thrown next to her, was Lord
Belgrave, her old and at one time (as some people fancied) favored
suitor. In this there was nothing at all extraordinary. Lord Grey de
Wilton, an old _alumnus_ of this Manchester Grammar School, and an
_alumnus_ during the early reign of this same _Archididascalus_,
made a point of showing honor to his ancient tutor, especially now when
reputed to be decaying; and with the same view he brought Lord
Belgrave, who had become his son-in-law after his rejection
by Lady Carbery. The whole was a very natural accident. But
Lady Carbery was not sufficiently bronzed by worldly habits to treat
this accident with _nonchalance_. She did not _to the public
eye_ betray any embarrassment; but afterwards she told me that no
incident could have been more distressing to her.

Some months after this, the Laxton party quitted Manchester, having no
further motive for staying. Mrs. Schreiber was now confessedly dying:
medical skill could do no more for her; and this being so, there was no
reason why she should continue to exchange her own quiet little
Rutlandshire cottage for the discomforts of smoky lodgings. Lady
Carbery retired like some golden pageant amongst the clouds; thick
darkness succeeded; the ancient torpor reestablished itself; and my
health grew distressingly worse. Then it was, after dreadful self-
conflicts, that I took the unhappy resolution of which the results are
recorded in the "Opium Confessions." At this point, the reader must
understand, comes in that chapter of my life; and for all which
concerns that delirious period I refer him to those "Confessions." Some
anxiety I had, on leaving Manchester, lest my mother should suffer too
much from this rash step; and on that impulse I altered the direction
of my wanderings; not going (as I had originally planned) to the
English Lakes, but making first of all for St. John's Priory, Chester,
at that time my mother's residence. There I found my maternal uncle,
Captain Penson, of the Bengal establishment, just recently come home on
a two years' leave of absence; and there I had an interview with my
mother. By a temporary arrangement I received a weekly allowance, which
would have enabled me to live in _any_ district of Wales, either
North or South; for Wales, both North and South, is (or at any rate
_was_) a land of exemplary cheapness. For instance, at Talyllyn,
in Merionethshire, or anywhere off the line of tourists, I and a
lieutenant in our English navy paid sixpence uniformly for a handsome
dinner; sixpence, I mean, apiece. But two months later came a golden
blockhead, who instructed the people that it was "sinful" to charge
less than three shillings. In Wales, meantime, I suffered grievously
from want of books; and fancying, in my profound ignorance of the
world, that I could borrow money upon my own expectations, or, at
least, that I could do so with the joint security of Lord Westport (now
Earl of Altamont, upon his father's elevation to the Marquisate of
Sligo), or (failing _that_) with the security of his amiable and
friendly cousin, the Earl of Desart, I had the unpardonable folly to
quit the deep tranquillities of North Wales for the uproars, and
perils, and the certain miseries, of London. I had borrowed ten guineas
from Lady Carbery; and at that time, when my purpose was known to
nobody, I might have borrowed any sum I pleased. But I could never
again avail myself of that resource, because I must have given some
address, in order to insure the receipt of Lady Carbery's answer; and
in that case, so sternly conscientious was she, that, under the notion
of saving me from ruin, my address would have been immediately
communicated to my guardians, and by them would have been confided to
the unrivalled detective talents, in those days, of Townsend, or some
other Bow-street officer.

That episode, or impassioned parenthesis in my life, which is
comprehended in "The Confessions of the Opium-Eater," had finished;
suppose it over and gone, and once more, after the storms of London,
suppose me resting from my dreadful remembrances, in the deep monastic
tranquillity, of St. John's Priory; and just then, by accident, with no
associates except my mother and my uncle. What was the Priory like? Was
it young or old, handsome or plain? What was my uncle the captain like?
Young or old, handsome or plain? Wait a little, my reader; give me
time, and I will tell you all. My uncle's leave of absence from India
had not expired; in fact, it had nine or ten months still to run; and
this accident furnished us all with an opportunity of witnessing his
preternatural activity. One morning early in April of the year 1803, a
gentleman called at the Priory, and mentioned, as the news of the
morning brought down by the London mail, that there had been a very hot
and very sudden "press" along the Thames, and simultaneously at the
outports. Indeed, before this the spiteful tone of Sebastiani's Report,
together with the arrogant comment in the _Moniteur_ on the
supposed inability of Great Britain to contend "single-handed" with
France; and, finally, the public brutality to our ambassador, had
prepared us all for war. But, then, might not all this blow over? No;
apart from any choice or preference of war on the part of Napoleon, his
very existence depended upon war. He lived by and through the army.
Without a succession of wars and martial glories in reserve for the
army, what interest had _they_ in Napoleon? This was obscurely
acknowledged by everybody. More or less consciously perceived, a
feeling deep and strong ran through the nation that it was vain to seek
expedients or delays; a mighty strife had to be fought out, which could
not be evaded. Thence it was that the volunteer system was so rapidly
and earnestly developed. As a first stage in the process of national
enthusiasm, this was invaluable. The first impulse drew out the
material.

Next, as might have been foreseen, came an experience which taught us
seasonably that these redundant materials, crude and miscellaneous,
required a winnowing and sifting, which very soon we had; and the
result was, an incomparable militia. Chester shone conspicuously in
this noble competition. But here, as elsewhere, at first there was no
cavalry. Upon that arose a knot of gentlemen, chiefly those who hunted,
and in a very few hours laid the foundation of a small cavalry force.
Three troops were raised in the _city_ of Chester, one of the
three being given to my uncle. The whole were under the command of
Colonel Dod, who had a landed estate in the county, and who (like my
uncle) had been in India. But Colonel Dod and the captains of the two
other troops gave comparatively little aid. The whole working
activities of the system rested with my uncle. Then first I saw energy:
then first I knew what it meant. All the officers of the three troops
exchanged dinner-parties with each other; and consequently they dined
at the Priory often enough to make us acquainted with their
characteristic qualities. That period had not yet passed away, though
it was already passing, when gentlemen did not willingly leave the
dinner-table in a state of absolute sobriety. Colonel Dod and my uncle
had learned in Bengal, under the coërcion of the climate, habits of
temperance. But the others (though few, perhaps, might be systematic
drinkers) were careless in this respect, and drank under social
excitement quite enough to lay bare the ruling tendencies of their
several characters. Being English, naturally the majority were
energetic, and beyond all things despised dreaming _fainéans_
(such, for instance, as we find the politicians, or even the
conspirators, of Italy, Spain, and Germany, whose whole power of action
evaporates in talking, and histrionically gesticulating). Yet still the
best of them seemed inert by comparison with my uncle, and to regard
_his_ standard of action and exertion as trespassing to a needless
degree upon ordinary human comfort.

Commonplace, meantime, my uncle was in the character of his intellect;
there he fell a thousand leagues below my mother, to whom he looked up
with affectionate astonishment. But, as a man of action, he ran so far
ahead of men generally, that he ceased to impress one as commonplace.
He, if any man ever did, realized the Roman poet's description of being
_natus rebus agendis_--sent into this world not for talking, but
for doing; not for counsel, but for execution. On that field he was a
portentous man, a monster; and, viewing him as such, I am disposed to
concede a few words to what modern slang denominates his "antecedents."

Two brothers and one sister (namely, my mother) composed the household
choir of children gathering round the hearth of my maternal grand-
parents, whose name was Penson. My grandfather at one time held an
office under the king; how named, I once heard, but have forgotten;
only this I remember, that it was an office which conferred the title
of _Esquire;_ so that upon each and all of his several coffins,
lead, oak, mahogany, he was entitled to proclaim himself an
_Armiger;_ which, observe, is the newest, oldest, most classic
mode of saying that one is privileged to bear arms in a sense
intelligible only to the Herald's College. This _Armiger_, this
undeniable Squire, was doubly distinguished: first, by his iron
constitution and impregnable health; which were of such quality, and
like the sword of Michael, the warrior-angel ("Paradise Lost," B. vi.),
had "from the armory of God been given him tempered so," that no
insurance office, trafficking in life-annuities, would have ventured to
look him in the face. People thought him good, like a cat, for eight or
nine generations; nor did any man perceive at what avenue death could
find, or disease could force, a practicable breach; and yet, such
anchorage have all human hopes, in the very midst of these windy
anticipations, this same granite grandpapa of mine, not yet very far
ahead of sixty, being in fact three-score years and none, suddenly
struck his flag, and found himself, in his privileged character of
_Armiger_, needing those door (coffin-door) plates, which all
reasonable people had supposed to be reserved for the manufacturing
hands of some remote century. "_Armiger_, pack up your traps"--
"Collige sarcinas"--"Squire, you're wanted:" these dreadful citations
were inevitable; come they must; but surely, as everybody thought, not
in the eighteenth, or, perhaps, even the nineteenth century. _Diis
aliter visum._ My grandfather, built for an _Ćonian_ duration,
did not come within hail of myself; whilst his gentle partner, my
grandmother, who made no show of extra longevity, lived down into my
period, and had the benefit of my acquaintance through half a dozen
years. If she turned this piece of good fortune to no great practical
account, that (you know) was no fault of mine. Doubtless, I was ready
with my advice, freely and gratuitously, if she had condescended to ask
for it. Returning to my grandfather: the other distinguishing
endowment, by which he was so favorably known and remembered amongst
his friends, was the magical versatility of his talents, and his power
of self-accommodation to all humors, tempers, and ages.

And in allusion to this line from Horace it was, that amongst his
literary friends he was known familiarly by the name of Aristippus. His
sons, Edward and Thomas, resembled him, by all accounts, in nothing;
neither physically, nor in moral versatility. These two sons of the
Squire, Edward and Thomas, through some traditional prejudice in the
family, had always directed their views to the military profession. In
such a case, the king's army is naturally that to which a young man's
expectations turn. But to wait, and after all by possibility to wait in
vain, did not suit my fiery grandfather. The interest which he could
put into motion was considerable; but it was more applicable to the
service of the East India Company than to any branch of the home
service. This interest was so exerted that in one day he obtained a
lieutenantcy in the Company's service for each of his sons. About 1780
or 1781, both young men, aged severally sixteen and seventeen years,
went out to join their regiments, both regiments being on the Bengal
establishment. Very different were their fates; yet their
qualifications ought to have been the same, or differing only as
sixteen differs from seventeen; and also as sixteen overflowing with
levity differs from seventeen prematurely thoughtful. Edward Penson was
early noticed for his high principle, for his benignity, and for a
thoughtfulness somewhat sorrowful, that seemed to have caught in
childhood some fugitive glimpse of his own too brief career. At
noonday, in some part of Bengal, he went out of doors bareheaded, and
died in a few hours.

In 1800-1801, my mother had become dissatisfied with Bath as a
residence; and, being free from all ties connecting her with any one
county of England rather than another, she resolved to traverse the
most attractive parts of the island, and, upon personal inspection, to
select a home; not a ready-built home, but the ground on which she
might herself create one; for it happened that amongst the few
infirmities besetting my mother's habits and constitution of mind, was
the costly one of seeking her chief intellectual excitement in
architectural creations. She individually might be said to have built
Greenhay; since to _her_ views of domestic elegance and propriety
my father had resigned _almost_ everything. This was her _coup-
d'essai_; secondly, she built the complement to the Priory in
Cheshire, which cost about one thousand pounds; thirdly, Westhay, in
Somersetshire, about twelve miles from Bristol, which, including the
land attached to the house, cost twelve thousand five hundred pounds,
not including subsequent additions; but this was built at the cost of
my uncle; finally, Weston Lea, close to Bath, which being designed
simply for herself in old age, with a moderate establishment of four
servants (and some reasonable provision of accommodations for a few
visitors), cost originally, I believe, not more than one thousand
pounds--excluding, however, the cost of all after alterations.

It may serve to show how inevitably an amateur architect, without
professional aid and counsel, will be defrauded, that the first of
these houses, which cost six thousand pounds, sold for no more than
twenty-five hundred pounds, and the third for no more than five
thousand pounds. The person who superintended the workmen, and had the
whole practical management of one amongst these four houses, was a
common builder, without capital or education, and the greatest knave
that personally I have known. It may illustrate the way in which lady
architects, without professional aid, are and ever will be defrauded,
that, after all was finished, and the entire wood-work was to be
measured and valued, each party, of course, needing to be represented
by a professional agent, naturally the knavish builder was ready at
earliest dawn with _his_ agent; but, as regarded my mother's
interest, the task of engaging such an agent had been confided to a
neighboring clergyman,--"evangelical," of course, and a humble
sycophant of Hannah More, but otherwise the most helpless of human
beings, baptized or infidel. He contented himself with instructing a
young gentleman, aged about fifteen, to take his pony and ride over to
a distant cathedral town, which was honored by the abode of a virtuous
though drunken surveyor. This respectable drunkard he was to engage,
and also with obvious discretion to fee beforehand. All which was done:
the drunken surveyor had a sort of fits, it was understood, that always
towards sunset inclined him to assume the horizontal posture.
Fortunately, however, for that part of mankind whom circumstances had
brought under the necessity of communicating with him, these fits were
intermitting; so that, for instance, in the present case, upon a severe
call arising for his pocketing the fee of ten guineas, he astonished
his whole household by suddenly standing bolt upright as stiff as a
poker; his sister remarking to the young gentleman that he (the
visitor) was in luck that evening: it wasn't everybody that could get
that length in dealing with Mr. X. O. However, it is distressing to
relate that the fits immediately returned; and, with that degree of
exasperation which made it dangerous to suggest the idea of a receipt;
since that must have required the vertical attitude. Whether that
attitude ever was recovered by the unfortunate gentleman, I do not
know. Forty-and-four years have passed since then. Almost everybody
connected with the case has had time to assume permanently the
horizontal posture,--namely, that knave of a builder, whose knaveries
(gilded by that morning sun of June) were controlled by nobody; that
sycophantish parson; that young gentleman of fifteen (now, alas! fifty-
nine), who must long since have sown his wild oats; that unhappy pony
of eighteen (now, alas! sixty-two, if living; ah! venerable pony, that
must (or mustest) now require thy oats to be boiled); in short, one and
all of these venerabilities--knaves, ponies, drunkards, receipts--have
descended, I believe, to chaos or to Hades, with hardly one exception.
Chancery itself, though somewhat of an Indian juggler, could not play
with such aerial balls as these.

On what ground it was that my mother quarrelled with the advantages of
Bath, so many and so conspicuous, I cannot guess. At that time, namely,
the opening of the nineteenth century, the old traditionary custom of
the place had established for young and old the luxury of sedan-chairs.
Nine tenths, at least, of the colds and catarrhs, those initial stages
of all pulmonary complaints (the capital scourge of England), are
caught in the transit between the door of a carriage and the genial
atmosphere of the drawing-room. By a sedan-chair all this danger was
evaded: your two chairmen marched right into the hall: the hall-door
was closed; and not until then was the roof and the door of your chair
opened: the translation was--from one room to another. To my mother,
and many in her situation, the sedan-chair recommended itself also by
advantages of another class. Immediately on coming to Bath her carriage
was "laid up in ordinary." The trifling rent of a coach-house, some
slight annual repairs, and the tax, composed the whole annual cost. At
that time, and throughout the war, the usual estimate for the cost of a
close carriage in London was three hundred and twenty pounds; since, in
order to have the certain services of two horses, it was indispensable
to keep three. Add to this the coachman, the wear-and-tear of harness,
and the duty; and, even in Bath, a cheaper place than London, you could
not accomplish the total service under two hundred and seventy pounds.
Now, except the duty, all this expense was at once superseded by the
sedan-chair--rarely costing you above ten shillings a week, that is,
twenty-five guineas a year, and liberating you from all care or
anxiety. The duty on four wheels, it is true, was suddenly exalted by
Mr. Pitt's triple assessment from twelve guineas to thirty-six; but
what a trifle by comparison with the cost of horses and coachman! And,
then, no demands for money were ever met so cheerfully by my mother as
those which went to support Mr. Pitt's policy against Jacobinism and
Regicide. At present, after five years' sinecure existence, unless on
the rare summons of a journey, this dormant carriage was suddenly
undocked, and put into commission. Taking with her two servants, and
one of my sisters, my mother now entered upon a _periplus_, or
systematic circumnavigation of all England; and in England only--
through the admirable machinery matured for such a purpose, namely,
inns, innkeepers, servants, horses, all first-rate of their class--it
was possible to pursue such a scheme in the midst of domestic comfort.
My mother's resolution was--to see all England with her own eyes, and
to judge for herself upon the qualifications of each county, each town
(not being a bustling seat of commerce), and each village (having any
advantages of scenery), for contributing the main elements towards a
home that might justify her in building a house. The qualifications
insisted on were these five: good medical advice somewhere in the
neighborhood; first-rate means of education; elegant (or, what most
people might think, aristocratic) society; agreeable scenery: and so
far the difficulty was not insuperable in the way of finding all the
four advantages concentrated. But my mother insisted on a fifth, which
in those days insured the instant shipwreck of the entire scheme; this
was a church of England parish clergyman, who was to be strictly
orthodox, faithful to the articles of our English church, yet to these
articles as interpreted by Evangelical divinity. My mother's views were
precisely those of her friend Mrs. Hannah More, of Wilberforce, of
Henry Thornton, of Zachary Macaulay (father of the historian), and
generally of those who were then known amongst sneerers as "the Clapham
saints." This one requisition it was on which the scheme foundered. And
the fact merits recording as an exposition of the broad religious
difference between the England of that day and of this. At present, no
difficulty would be found as to this fifth requisition. "Evangelical"
clergymen are now sown broad-cast; at that period, there were not, on
an average, above six or eight in each of the fifty-two counties.

The conditions, as a whole, were in fact incapable of being realized;
where two or three were attained, three or two failed. It was too much
to exact so many advantages from any one place, unless London; or
really, if any other place could be looked to with hope in such a
chase, that place was Bath--the very city my mother was preparing to
leave. Yet, had this been otherwise, and the prospect of success more
promising, I have not a doubt that the pretty gem, which suddenly was
offered at a price unintelligibly low, in the ancient city of Chester,
would have availed (as instantly it _did_ avail, and, perhaps,
ought to have availed) in obscuring those five conditions of which else
each separately for itself had seemed a _conditio sine qua non_.
This gem was an ancient house, on a miniature scale, called the
_Priory_; and, until the dissolution of religious houses in the
earlier half of the sixteenth century, had formed part of the Priory
attached to the ancient church (still flourishing) of St. John's.
Towards the end of the sixteenth and through the first quarter of the
seventeenth century, this Priory had been in the occupation of Sir
Robert Cotton, the antiquary, the friend of Ben Jonson, of Coke, of
Selden, etc., and advantageously known as one of those who applied his
legal and historical knowledge to the bending back into constitutional
moulds of those despotic twists which new interests and false counsels
had developed in the Tudor and Stuart dynasties. It was an exceedingly
pretty place; and the kitchen, upon the ground story, which had a noble
groined ceiling of stone, indicated, by its disproportionate scale, the
magnitude of the establishment to which once it had ministered.
Attached to this splendid kitchen were tributary offices, etc. On the
upper story were exactly five rooms: namely, a servants' dormitory,
meant in Sir Robert's day for two beds at the
least; and a servants' sitting-room. These were shut off into a
separate section, with a little staircase (like a ship's companion-
ladder) and a little lobby of its own. But the principal section on
this upper story had been dedicated to the use of Sir Robert, and
consisted of a pretty old hall, lighted by an old monastic-painted
window in the door of entrance; secondly, a rather elegant dining-room;
thirdly, a bed-room. The glory of the house internally lay in the
monastic kitchen; and, secondly, in what a Frenchman would have called,
properly, Sir Robert's own _apartment_ of three rooms; but, thirdly and chiefly,
in a pile of ruined archways, most picturesque so far as they went, but
so small that Drury Lane could easily have found room for them on its
stage. These stood in the miniature pleasure-ground, and were
constantly resorted to by artists for specimens of architectural
decays, or of nature working for the concealment of such decays by her
ordinary processes of gorgeous floral vegetation. Ten rooms there may
have been in the Priory, as offered to my mother for less than five
hundred pounds. A drawing-room, bed-rooms, dressing-rooms, etc., making
about ten more, were added by my mother for a sum under one thousand
pounds. The same miniature scale was observed in all these additions.
And, as the Priory was not within the walls of the city, whilst the
river Dee, flowing immediately below, secured it from annoyance on one
side, and the church, with its adjacent church-yard, insulated it from
the tumults of life on all the other sides, an atmosphere of conventual
stillness and tranquillity brooded over it and all around it forever.

Such was the house, such was the society, in which I now found myself;
and upon the whole I might describe myself as being, according to the
modern phrase, "in a false position." I had, for instance, a vast
superiority, as was to have been expected, in bookish attainments, and
in adroitness of logic; whilst, on the other hand, I was ridiculously
short-sighted or blind in all fields of ordinary human experience. It
must not be supposed that I regarded my own particular points of
superiority, or that I used them, with any vanity or view to present
advantages. On the contrary, I sickened over them, and labored to
defeat them. But in vain I sowed errors in my premises, or planted
absurdities in my assumptions. Vainly I tried such blunders as putting
four terms into a syllogism, which, as all the world knows, ought to
run on three; a tripod it ought to be, by all rules known to man, and,
behold, I forced it to become a quadruped. Upon my uncle's military
haste, and tumultuous energy in pressing his opinions, all such
delicate refinements were absolutely thrown away. With disgust _I_
saw, with disgust _he_ saw, that too apparently the advantage lay
with me in the result; and, whilst I worked like a dragon to place
myself in the wrong, some fiend apparently so counterworked me, that
eternally I was reminded of the Manx half-pennies, which lately I had
continually seen current in North Wales, bearing for their heraldic
distinction three human legs in armor, but so placed in relation to
each other that always one leg is vertical and mounting guard on behalf
of the other two, which, therefore, are enabled to sprawl aloft in the
air--in fact, to be as absurdly negligent as they choose, relying upon
their vigilant brother below, and upon the written legend or motto,
STABIT QUOCUNQUE JECERIS (Stand it will upright, though you should
fling it in any conceivable direction). What gave another feature of
distraction and incoherency to my position was, that I still occupied
the position of a reputed boy, nay, a child, in the estimate of my
audience, and of a child in disgrace. Time enough had not passed since
my elopement from school to win for me, in minds so fresh from that
remembrance, a station of purification and assoilment. Oxford might
avail to assoil me, and to throw into a distant retrospect my boyish
trespasses; but as yet Oxford had not arrived. I committed, besides, a
great fault in taking often a tone of mock seriousness, when the
detection of the playful extravagance was left to the discernment or
quick sympathy of the hearer; and I was blind to the fact, that neither
my mother nor my uncle was distinguished by any natural liveliness of
vision for the comic, or any toleration for the extravagant. My mother,
for example, had an awful sense of conscientious fidelity in the
payment of taxes. Many a respectable family I have known that would
privately have encouraged a smuggler, and, in consequence, were beset
continually by mock smugglers, offering, with airs of affected mystery,
home commodities liable to no custom-house objections whatsoever, only
at a hyperbolical price. I remember even the case of a duke, who bought
in Piccadilly, under laughable circumstances of complex disguise, some
silk handkerchiefs, falsely pretending to be foreign, and was so
incensed at finding himself to have been committing no breach of law
whatever, but simply to have been paying double the ordinary shop
price, that he pulled up the _soi-disant_ smuggler to Bowstreet,
even at the certain price of exposure to himself. The charge he alleged
against the man was the untenable one of _not_ being a smuggler.
My mother, on the contrary, pronounced all such attempts at cheating
the king, or, as I less harshly termed it, cheating the tax-gatherer,
as being equal in guilt to a fraud upon one's neighbor, or to direct
appropriation of another man's purse. I, on my part, held, that
government, having often defrauded me through its agent and creature
the post-office, by monstrous over-charges on letters, had thus created
in my behalf a right of retaliation. And dreadfully it annoyed my
mother, that I, stating this right in a very plausible rule-of-three
form--namely, As is the income of the said fraudulent government to my
poor patrimonial income of one hundred and fifty pounds per annum, so
is any one special fraud (as, for instance, that of yesterday morning,
amounting to thirteen pence upon a single letter) to that equitable
penalty which I am entitled to recover upon the goods and chattels
(wherever found) of the ill-advised Britannic government. During the
war with Napoleon, the income of this government ran, to all amounts,
between fifty and seventy millions pounds sterling. Awful, therefore,
seemed the inheritance of retaliation, inexhaustible the fund of
reprisals, into which I stepped. Since, even a single case of robbery,
such as I could plead by dozens, in the course of a few years, though
no more than thirteen pence, yet multiplied into seventy million times
two hundred and forty pence, _minus_ one hundred and fifty pounds,
made a very comfortable property. The right was clear; and the sole
difficulty lay in asserting it; in fact, that same difficulty which
beset the philosopher of old, in arguing with the Emperor Hadrian;
namely, the want of thirty legions for the purpose of clearly pointing
out to Cćsar where it was that the truth lay; the secret truth; that
rarest of all "nuggets."

This counter-challenge of government, as the first mover in a system of
frauds, annoyed, but also perplexed my mother exceedingly. For an
argument that shaped itself into a rule-of-three illustration seemed
really to wear too candid an aspect for summary and absolute rejection.

Such discussions wore to me a comic shape. But altogether serious were
the disputes upon INDIA--a topic on separate grounds equally
interesting to us all, as the mightiest of English colonies, and the
superbest monument of demoniac English energy, revealing itself in such
men as Clive, Hastings, and soon after in the two Wellesleys. To my
mother, as the grave of one brother, as the home of another, and as a
new centre from which Christianity (she hoped) would mount like an
eagle; for just about that time the Bible Society was preparing its
initial movements; whilst to my uncle India appeared as the
_arena_ upon which his activities were yet to find their adequate
career. With respect to the Christianization of India, my uncle assumed
a hope which he did not really feel; and in another point, more trying
to himself personally, he had soon an opportunity for showing the
sincerity of this deference to his spiritual-minded sister. For, very
soon after his return to India, he received a civil appointment
(_Superintendent of Military Buildings in Bengal_), highly
lucrative, and the more so as it could be held conjointly with his
military rank; but a good deal of its pecuniary advantages was said to
lie in fees, or perquisites, privately offered, but perfectly regular
and official, which my mother (misunderstanding the Indian system)
chose to call "bribes." A very ugly word was _that_; but I argued
that even at home, even in the courts at Westminster, in the very
fountains of justice, private fees constituted one part of the
salaries--a fair and official part, so long as Parliament had not made
such fees illegal by commuting them for known and fixed equivalents.

 It was mere ignorance of India, as I dutifully insisted against
"Mamma," that could confound these regular oriental "nuzzers" with the
clandestine wages of corruption. The _pot-de-vin_ of French
tradition, the pair of gloves (though at one time very costly gloves)
to an English judge of assize on certain occasions, never was offered
nor received in the light of a bribe. And (until regularly abolished by
the legislature) I insisted--but vainly insisted--that these and
similar _honoraria_ ought to be accepted, because else you were
lowering the prescriptive rights and value of the office, which you--a
mere _locum tenens_ for some coming successor--had no right to do
upon a solitary scruple or crotchet, arising probably from dyspepsia.
Better men, no doubt, than ever stood in _your_ stockings, had
pocketed thankfully the gifts of ancient, time-honored custom. My
uncle, however, though not with the carnal recusancy which besieged the
spiritual efforts of poor Cuthbert Headrigg, that incorrigible
worldling, yet still with intermitting doubts, followed my mother's
earnest entreaties, and the more meritoriously (I conceive), as he
yielded, in a point deeply affecting his interest, to a system of
arguments very imperfectly convincing to his understanding. He held the
office in question for as much (I believe) as eighteen or nineteen
years; and, by knowing old bilious Indians, who laughed immoderately at
my uncle and my mother, as the proper growth of a priory or some such
monastic establishment, I have been assured that nothing short of two
hundred thousand pounds ought, under the long tenure of office, to have
been remitted to England. But, then, said one of these gentlemen, if
your uncle lived (as I have heard that he did) in Calcutta and Meer-ut,
at the rate of four thousand pounds a year, _that_ would account
for a considerable share of a mine which else would seem to have been
worked in vain. Unquestionably, my uncle's system of living was under
no circumstances a self-denying one. To enjoy, and to make others
enjoy--_that_ was his law of action. Indeed, a more liberal creature,
or one of more princely munificence, never lived.

It might seem useless to call back any fragment of conversations
relating to India which passed more than fifty years ago, were it not
for two reasons: one of which is this,--that the errors (natural at
that time) which I vehemently opposed, not from any greater knowledge
that I had, but from closer reflection, are even now the prevailing
errors of the English people. My mother, for instance, uniformly spoke
of the English as the subverters of ancient thrones. I, on the
contrary, insisted that nothing political was ancient in India. Our own
original opponents, the Rajahs of Oude and Bengal, had been all
upstarts: in the Mysore, again, our more recent opponents, Hyder, and
his son Tippoo, were new men altogether, whose grandfathers were quite
unknown. Why was it that my mother, why is it that the English public
at this day, connect so false an image--that of high, cloudy antiquity
--with the thrones of India? It is simply from an old habit of
associating the spirit of change and rapid revolution with the
activities of Europe; so that, by a natural reaction of thought, the
Orient is figured as the home of motionless monotony. In things
religious, in habits, in costume, it _is_ so. But so far otherwise
in things political, that no instance can be alleged of any dynasty or
system of government that has endured beyond a century or two in the
East. Taking India in particular, the Mogul dynasty, established by
Baber, the great-grandson of Timour, did not subsist in any vigor for
two centuries; and yet this was by far the most durable of all
established princely houses. Another argument against England urged by
my mother (but equally urged by the English people at this day) was,
that she had in no eminent sense been a benefactress to India; or,
expressing it in words of later date, that the only memorials of our
rule, supposing us suddenly ejected from India, would be vast heaps of
champagne-bottles. I, on the other hand, alleged that our benefits,
like all truly great and lasting benefits (religious benefits, for
instance), must not be sought in external memorials of stone and
masonry. Higher by far than the Mogul gifts of mile-stones, or
travelling stations, or even roads and tanks, were the gifts of
security, of peace, of law, and settled order. These blessings were
travelling as fast as our rule advanced. I could not _then_ appeal
to the cases of Thuggee extirpated, of the Pindanees (full fifteen
thousand bloody murderers) forever exterminated, or of the Marhattas
bridled forever--a robber nation that previously had descended at
intervals with a force of sometimes one hundred and fifty thousand
troopers upon the afflicted province of Bengal, and Oude its neighbor;
because these were events as yet unborn. But they were the natural
extensions of that beneficent system on which I rested my argument. The
two terrors of India at that particular time were Holkar and Scindiah
(pronounced _Sindy_), who were soon cut short in their career by
the hostilities which they provoked with us, but would else have
proved, in combination, a deadlier scourge to India than either Hyder
or his ferocious son. My mother, in fact, a great reader of the poet
Cowper, drew from _him_ her notions of Anglo-Indian policy and its
effects. Cowper, in his "Task," puts the question.

My uncle, meantime, who from his Indian experience should reasonably
have known so much better, was disposed, from the mere passive habits
of hearing and reading unresistingly so many assaults of this tone
against our Indian policy, to go along with my mother. But he was too
just, when forced into reflection upon the subject, not to bend at
times to my way of stating the case for England. Suddenly, however, our
Indian discussions were brought to a close by the following incident.
My uncle had brought with him to England some Arabian horses, and
amongst them a beautiful young Persian mare, called Sumroo, the
gentlest of her race. Sumroo it was that he happened to be riding, upon
a frosty day. Unused to ice, she came down with him, and broke his
right leg. This accident laid him up for a month, during which my
mother and I read to him by turns. One book, which one day fell to my
share by accident, was De Foe's "Memoirs of a Cavalier." This book
attempts to give a picture of the Parliamentary war; but in some places
an unfair, and everywhere a most superficial account. I said so; and my
uncle, who had an old craze in behalf of the book, opposed me with
asperity; and, in the course of what he said, under some movement of
ill-temper, he asked me, in a way which I felt to be taunting, how I
could consent to waste my time as I did. Without any answering warmth,
I explained that my guardians, having quarrelled with me, would not
grant for my use anything beyond my school allowance of one hundred
pounds per annum. But was it not possible that even this sum might by
economy be made to meet the necessities of the case? I replied that,
from what I had heard, very probably it was. Would I undertake an
Oxford life upon such terms? Most gladly, I said. Upon that opening he
spoke to my mother; and the result was, that, within seven days from
the above conversation, I found myself entering that time-honored
university.

It was in winter, and in the wintry weather of the year 1803, that I
first entered Oxford with a view to its vast means of education, or
rather with a view to its vast advantages for study. A ludicrous story
is told of a young candidate for clerical orders--that, being asked by
the bishop's chaplain if he had ever "been to Oxford," as a colloquial
expression for having had an academic education, he replied, "No: but
he had twice been to Abingdon:" Abingdon being only seven miles
distant. In the same sense I might say that once before I had been at
Oxford: but _that_ was as a transient visitor with Lord W----,
when we were both children. Now, on the contrary, I approached these
venerable towers in the character of a student, and with the purpose of
a long connection; personally interested in the constitution of the
university, and obscurely anticipating that in this city, or at least
during the period of my nominal attachment to this academic body, the
remoter parts of my future life would unfold before me. All hearts were
at this time occupied with the public interests of the country. The
"sorrow of the time" was ripening to a second harvest. Napoleon had
commenced his Vandal, or rather Hunnish War with Britain, in the spring
of this year, about eight months before; and profound public interest
it was, into which the very coldest hearts entered, that a little
divided with me the else monopolizing awe attached to the solemn act of
launching myself upon the world. That expression may seem too strong as
applied to one who had already been for many months a houseless
wanderer in Wales, and a solitary roamer in the streets of London. But
in those situations, it must be remembered, I was an unknown,
unacknowledged vagrant; and without money I could hardly run much risk,
except of breaking my neck. The perils, the pains, the pleasures, or
the obligations, of the world, scarcely exist in a proper sense for him
who has no funds. Perfect weakness is often secure; it is by imperfect
power, turned against its master, that men are snared and decoyed. Here
in Oxford I should be called upon to commence a sort of establishment
upon the splendid English scale; here I should share in many duties and
responsibilities, and should become henceforth an object of notice to a
large society. Now first becoming separately and individually
answerable for my conduct, and no longer absorbed into the general unit
of a family, I felt myself, for the first time, burthened with the
anxieties of a man, and a member of the world.

Oxford, ancient mother! hoary with ancestral honors, time-honored, and,
haply, it may be, time-shattered power--I owe thee nothing! Of thy vast
riches I took not a shilling, though living amongst multitudes who owed
to thee their daily bread. Not the less I owe thee justice; for that is
a universal debt. And at this moment, when I see thee called to thy
audit by unjust and malicious accusers--men with the hearts of
inquisitors and the purposes of robbers--I feel towards thee something
of filial reverence and duty. However, I mean not to speak as an
advocate, but as a conscientious witness in the simplicity of truth;
feeling neither hope nor fear of a personal nature, without fee, and
without favor.

I have been assured from many quarters that the great body of the
public are quite in the dark about the whole manner of living in our
English universities; and that a considerable portion of that public,
misled by the totally different constitution of universities in
Scotland, Ireland, and generally on the continent, as well as by the
different arrangements of collegiate life in those institutions, are in
a state worse than ignorant (that is, more unfavorable to the truth)--
starting, in fact, from prejudices, and absolute errors of fact, which
operate most uncharitably upon their construction of those insulated
statements, which are continually put forward by designing men. Hence,
I can well believe that it will be an acceptable service, at this
particular moment, when the very constitution of the two English
universities is under the unfriendly revision of Parliament, when some
roving commission may be annually looked for, under a contingency which
I will not utter in words (for I reverence the doctrine of
_euphćmismos_), far worse than Cromwellian, that is, merely
personal, and to winnow the existing corporation from disaffection to
the state--a Henry the Eighth commission of sequestration, and levelled
at the very integrity of the institution--under such prospects, I can
well believe that a true account of Oxford _as it is_ (which will
be valid also for Cambridge) must be welcome both to friend and foe.
And instead of giving this account didactically, or according to a
logical classification of the various items in the survey, I will give
it historically, or according to the order in which the most important
facts of the case opened themselves before myself, under the accidents
of my own personal inquiry. No situation could be better adapted than
my own for eliciting information; for, whereas most young men come to
the university under circumstances of absolute determination as to the
choice of their particular college, and have, therefore, no cause for
search or inquiry, I, on the contrary, came thither in solitary self-
dependence, and in the loosest state of indetermination.

Though neither giving nor accepting invitations for the first two years
of my residence, never but once had I reason to complain of a sneer, or
indeed any allusion whatever to habits which might be understood to
express poverty. Perhaps even then I had no reason to complain, for my
own conduct in that instance was unwise; and the allusion, though a
personality, and so far ill-bred, might be meant in real kindness. The
case was this: I neglected my dress in one point habitually; that is, I
wore clothes until they were threadbare--partly in the belief that my
gown would conceal their main defects, but much more from carelessness
and indisposition to spend upon a tailor what I had destined for a
bookseller. At length, an official person, of some weight in the
college, sent me a message on the subject through a friend. It was
couched in these terms: That, let a man possess what talents or
accomplishments he might, it was not possible for him to maintain his
proper station, in the public respect, amongst so many servants and
people, servile to external impressions, without some regard to the
elegance of his dress.

A reproof so courteously prefaced I could not take offence at; and at
that time I resolved to spend some cost upon decorating my person. But
always it happened that some book, or set of books,--that passion being
absolutely endless, and inexorable as the grave,--stepped between me
and my intentions; until one day, upon arranging my toilet hastily
before dinner, I suddenly made the discovery that I had no waistcoat
(or _vest_, as it is now called, through conceit or provincialism),
which was not torn or otherwise dilapidated; whereupon, buttoning up my
coat to the throat, and drawing my gown as close about me as possible,
I went into the public "hall" (so is called in Oxford the public
eating-room) with no misgiving. However, I was detected; for a
grave man, with a superlatively grave countenance, who happened on
that day to sit next me, but whom I did not personally know, addressing
his friend sitting opposite, begged to know if he had seen the last
Gazette, because he understood that it contained an order in council
laying an interdict upon the future use of waistcoats. His friend
replied, with the same perfect gravity, that it was a great
satisfaction to his mind that his majesty's government should have
issued so sensible an order; which he trusted would be soon followed up
by an interdict on breeches, they being still more disagreeable to pay
for. This said, without the movement on either side of a single muscle,
the two gentlemen passed to other subjects; and I inferred, upon the
whole, that, having detected my manoeuvre, they wished to put me on my
guard in the only way open to them. At any rate, this was the sole
personality, or equivocal allusion of any sort, which ever met my ear
during the years that I asserted my right to be as poor as I chose.
And, certainly, my censors were right, whatever were the temper in
which they spoke, kind or unkind; for a little extra care in the use of
clothes will always, under almost any extremity of poverty, pay for so
much extra cost as is essential to neatness and decorum, if not even to
elegance. They were right, and I was wrong, in a point which cannot be
neglected with impunity.

But, to enter upon my own history, and my sketch of Oxford life.--Late
on a winter's night, in the latter half of December, 1803, when a snow-
storm, and a heavy one, was already gathering in the air, a lazy
Birmingham coach, moving at four and a half miles an hour, brought me
through the long northern suburb of Oxford, to a shabby coach-inn,
situated in the Corn Market. Business was out of the question at that
hour. But the next day I assembled all the acquaintances I had in the
university, or had to my own knowledge; and to them, in council
assembled, propounded my first question: What college would they, in
their superior state of information, recommend to my choice? This
question leads to the first great characteristic of Oxford, as
distinguished from most other universities. Before me at this moment
lie several newspapers, reporting, at length, the installation in
office (as Chancellor) of the Duke of Wellington. The original Oxford
report, having occasion to mention the particular college from which
the official procession moved, had said, no doubt, that the gates of
University, the halls of University, &c., were at such a point of time
thrown open. But most of the provincial editors, not at all
comprehending that the reference was to an individual college, known by
the name of University College, one of twenty-five such establishments
in Oxford, had regularly corrected it into "gates of the University,"
&c. Here is the first misconception of all strangers. And this feature
of Oxford it is which has drawn such exclamations of astonishment from
foreigners. Lipsius, for example, protested with fervor, on first
seeing this vast establishment of Oxford, that one college of this
university was greater in its power and splendor, that it glorified and
illustrated the honors of literature more conspicuously by the pomps
with which it invested the ministers and machinery of education, than
any entire university of the continent.

What is a university almost everywhere else? It announces little more,
as respects the academic buildings, than that here is to be found the
place of rendezvous--the exchange, as it were, or, under a different
figure, the _palćstra_ of the various parties connected with the
prosecution of liberal studies. This is their "House of Call," their
general place of muster and parade. Here it is that the professors and
the students converge, with the certainty of meeting each other. Here,
in short, are the lecture-rooms in all the faculties. Well: thus far we
see an arrangement of convenience--that is, of convenience for one of
the parties, namely, the professors. To them it spares the disagreeable
circumstances connected with a private reception of their students at
their own rooms. But to the students it is a pure matter of
indifference. In all this there is certainly no service done to the
cause of good learning, which merits a state sanction, or the aid of
national funds. Next, however, comes an academic library, sometimes a
good one; and here commences a real use in giving a national station to
such institutions, because their durable and monumental existence,
liable to no flux or decay from individual caprice, or accidents of
life, and their authentic station, as expressions of the national
grandeur, point them out to the bequests of patriotic citizens. They
fall also under the benefit of another principle--the conservative
feeling of amateurship. Several great collections have been bequeathed
to the British Museum, for instance--not chiefly _as_ a national
institution, and under feelings of nationality, but because, being
such, it was also permanent; and thus the painful labors of collecting
were guaranteed from perishing. Independently of all this, I, for my
part, willingly behold the surplus of national funds dedicated to the
consecration, as it were, of learning, by raising temples to its honor,
even where they answer no purpose of direct use. Next, after the
service of religion, I would have the service of learning externally
embellished, recommended to the affections of men, and hallowed by the
votive sculptures, as I may say, of that affection, gathering in amount
from age to age. _Magnificabo apostolatum meum_ is a language
almost as becoming to the missionaries and ministers of knowledge, as
to the ambassadors of religion. It is fit that by pompous architectural
monuments, that a voice may forever be sounding audibly in human ears
of homage to these powers, and that even alien feelings may be
compelled into secret submission to their influence. Therefore, amongst
the number of those who value such things, upon the scale of direct
proximate utility, rank not me: that _arithmetica officina_ is in
my years abominable. But still I affirm that, in our analysis of an
ordinary university, or "college" as it is provincially called, we have
not yet arrived at any element of service rendered to knowledge or
education, large enough to call for very extensive national aid. Honor
has thus far been rendered to the good cause by a public attestation,
and that is well: but no direct promotion has been given to that cause,
no impulse communicated to its progress, such that it can be held out
as a result commensurate to the name and pretensions of a university.
As yet there is nothing accomplished which is beyond the strength of
any little commercial town. And as to the library in particular,
besides that in all essential departments it might be bought, to order,
by one day's common subscription of Liverpool or Glasgow merchants,
students very rarely indeed have admission to its free use.

What other functions remain to a university? For those which I have
mentioned of furnishing a point of rendezvous to the great body of
professors and students, and a point of concentration to the different
establishments of implements and machinery for elaborate researches
[as, for instance, of books and MSS., in the first place; secondly, of
maps, charts, and globes; and, thirdly, perhaps of the costly apparatus
required for such studies as Sideral astronomy, galvanic chemistry or
physiology, &c.]; all these are uses which cannot be regarded in a
higher light than as conveniences merely incidental and collateral to
the main views of the founders. There are, then, two much loftier and
more commanding ends met by the idea and constitution of such
institutions, and which first rise to a rank of dignity sufficient to
occupy the views of a legislator, or to warrant a national interest.
These ends are involved: 1st, in the practice of conferring
_degrees_, that is, formal attestations and guarantees of competence
to give advice, instruction, or aid, in the three great branches
of liberal knowledge applicable to human life; 2d, in that
appropriation of fixed funds to fixed professorships, by means of which
the uninterrupted succession of public and authorized teachers is
sustained in all the higher branches of knowledge, from generation to
generation, and from century to century. By the latter result it is
secured that the great well-heads of liberal knowledge and of severe
science shall never grow dry. By the former it is secured that this
unfailing fountain shall be continually applied to the production and
to the _tasting_ of fresh labors in endless succession for the
public service, and thus, in effect, that the great national fountain
shall not be a stagnant reservoir, but, by an endless _derivation_
(to speak in a Roman metaphor!), applied to a system of national
irrigation. These are the two great functions and qualifications of a
collegiate incorporation: one providing to each separate generation its
own separate rights of heirship to all the knowledge accumulated by its
predecessors, and converting a mere casual life-annuity into an estate
of inheritance--a mere fleeting _agonisma_ into a _ktćma es ći_; the
other securing for this eternal dowry as wide a distribution as
possible: the one function regarding the dimension of _length_ in the
endless series of ages through which it propagates its gifts; the other
regarding the dimension of _breadth_ in the large application
throughout any one generation of these gifts to the public service.
Here are grand functions, high purposes; but neither one nor the other
demands any edifices of stone and marble; neither one nor the other
presupposes any edifice at all built with human hands. A collegiate
incorporation, the church militant of knowledge, in its everlasting
struggle with darkness and error, is, in this respect, like the
church of Christ--that is, it is always and essentially invisible
to the fleshly eye. The pillars of this church are human champions; its
weapons are great truths so shaped as to meet the shifting forms of
error; its armories are piled and marshalled in human memories; its
cohesion lies in human zeal, in discipline, in childlike docility; and
all its triumphs, its pomps, and glories, must forever depend upon
talent, upon the energies of the will, and upon the harmonious
cooperation of its several divisions. Thus far, I say, there is no call
made out for _any_ intervention of the architect.

Let me apply all this to Oxford. Among the four functions commonly
recognized by the founders of universities, which are--1st, to find a
set of halls or places of meeting; 2d, to find the implements and
accessaries of study; 3d, to secure the succession of teachers and
learners; 4th, to secure the profitable application of their
attainments to the public service. Of these four, the two highest need
no buildings; and the other two, which are mere collateral functions of
convenience, need only a small one. Wherefore, then, and to what end,
are the vast systems of building, the palaces and towers of Oxford?
These are either altogether superfluous, mere badges of ostentation and
luxurious wealth, or they point to some fifth function not so much as
contemplated by other universities, and, at present, absolutely and
chimerically beyond their means of attainment. Formerly we used to hear
attacks upon the Oxford discipline as fitted to the true
_intellectual_ purposes of a modern education. Those attacks, weak
and most uninstructed in facts, false as to all that they challenged,
and puerile as to what implicitly they propounded for homage, are
silent. But, of late, the battery has been pointed against the Oxford
discipline in its _moral_ aspects, as fitted for the government
and restraint of young men, or even as at all contemplating any such
control. The Beverleys would have us suppose, not only that the great
body of the students are a licentious crew, acknowledging no discipline
or restraints, but that the grave elders of the university, and those
who wield the nominal authority of the place, passively resign the very
shows of power, and connive at general excesses, even when they do not
absolutely authorize them in their personal examples. Now, when such
representations are made, to what standard of a just discipline is it
that these writers would be understood as appealing? Is it to some
ideal, or to some existing and known reality? Would they have England
suppose that they are here comparing the actual Oxford with some
possible hypothetic or imaginable Oxford,--with some ideal case, that
is to say, about which great discussions would arise as to its
feasibility,--or that they are comparing it with some known standard of
discipline actually realized and sustained for generations, in Leipsic,
suppose, or Edinburgh, or Leyden, or Salamanca? This is the question of
questions, to which we may demand an answer; and, according to that
answer, observe the dilemma into which these furciferous knaves must
drop. If they are comparing Oxford simply with some ideal and better
Oxford, in some ideal and better world, in that case all they have
said--waiving its falsehoods of fact--is no more than a flourish of
rhetoric, and the whole discussion may be referred to the shadowy
combats of scholastic declamation-mongers--those mock gladiators, and
_umbratiles doctores_. But if, on the other hand, they pretend to
take their station upon the known basis of some existing institution,--
if they will pretend that, in this impeachment of Oxford, they are
proceeding upon a silent comparison with Edinburgh, Glasgow, Jena,
Leipsic, Padua, &c.,--then are they self-exposed, as men not only
without truth, but without shame. For now comes in, as a sudden
revelation, and as a sort of _deus ex machina_, for the vindication
of the truth, the simple answer to that question proposed above,
Wherefore, and to what end, are the vast edifices of Oxford? A
university, as universities are in general, needs not, I have shown, to
be a visible body--a building raised with hands. Wherefore, then, is
the _visible_ Oxford? To what _fifth_ end, refining upon the
ordinary ends of such institutions, is the far-stretching system of
Oxford _hospitia_, or monastic hotels, directed by their founders,
or applied by their present possessors? Hearken, reader, to the answer:

These vast piles are applied to an end, absolutely indispensable to any
even tolerable system of discipline, and yet absolutely unattainable
upon any commensurate scale in any other university of Europe. They are
applied to the personal settlement and domestication of the students
within the gates and walls of that college to whose discipline they are
amenable. Everywhere else the young men live _where_ they please
and _as_ they please; necessarily distributed amongst the towns-
people; in any case, therefore, liable to no control or supervision
whatever; and in those cases where the university forms but a small
part of a vast capital city, as it does in Paris, Edinburgh, Madrid,
Vienna, Berlin, and Petersburg, liable to every mode of positive
temptation and distraction, which besiege human life in high-viced and
luxurious communities. Here, therefore, it is a mockery to talk of
discipline; of a nonentity there can be no qualities; and we need not
ask for the description of the discipline in situations where
discipline there can be none. One slight anomaly I have heard of as
varying _pro tanto_ the uniform features of this picture. In
Glasgow I have heard of an arrangement by which young academicians are
placed in the family of a professor. Here, as members of a private
household, and that household under the presiding eye of a
conscientious, paternal, and judicious scholar, doubtless they would
enjoy as absolute a shelter from peril and worldly contagion as parents
could wish; but not _more_ absolute, I affirm, than belongs,
unavoidably, to the monastic seclusion of an Oxford college--the gates
of which open to no egress after nine o'clock at night, nor after
eleven to any ingress which is not regularly reported to a proper
officer of the establishment. The two forms of restraint are, as
respects the effectual amount of control, equal; and were they equally
diffused, Glasgow and Oxford would, in this point, stand upon the same
level of discipline. But it happens that the Glasgow case was a
personal accident; personal, both as regarded him who volunteered the
exercise of this control, and those who volunteered to appropriate its
benefits; whereas the Oxford case belongs to the very system, is
coextensive with the body of undergraduates, and, from the very
arrangement of Oxford life, is liable to no decay or intermission.

Here, then, the reader apprehends the first great characteristic
distinction of Oxford--that distinction which extorted the rapturous
admiration of Lipsius as an exponent of enormous wealth, but which I
now mention as applying, with ruinous effect, to the late calumnies
upon Oxford, as an inseparable exponent of her meritorious discipline.
She, most truly and severely an "Alma Mater" gathers all the juvenile
part of her flock within her own fold, and beneath her own vigilant
supervision. In Cambridge there is, so far, a laxer administration of
this rule, that, when any college overflows, undergraduates are allowed
to lodge at large in the town. But in Oxford this increase of peril and
discretionary power is thrown by preference upon the senior graduates,
who are seldom below the age of twenty-two or twenty-three; and the
college accommodations are reserved, in almost their whole extent, for
the most youthful part of the society. This extent is prodigious. Even
in my time, upwards of two thousand persons were lodged within the
colleges; none having fewer than two rooms, very many having three, and
men of rank, or luxurious habits, having often large suites of rooms.
But that was a time of war, which Oxford experience has shown to have
operated most disproportionably as a drain upon the numbers disposable
for liberal studies; and the total capacity of the university was far
from being exhausted. There are now, I believe, between five and six
thousand names upon the Oxford books; and more than four thousand, I
understand, of constant residents. So that Oxford is well able to
lodge, and on a very sumptuous scale, a small army of men; which
expression of her great splendor I now mention (as I repeat) purely as
applying to the question of her machinery for enforcing discipline.
This part of her machinery, it will be seen, is unique, and absolutely
peculiar to herself. Other universities, boasting no such enormous
wealth, cannot be expected to act upon her system of seclusion.
Certainly, I make it no reproach to other universities, that, not
possessing the means of sequestering their young men from worldly
communion, they must abide by the evils of a laxer discipline. It is
their misfortune, and not their criminal neglect, which consents to so
dismal a relaxation of academic habits. But let them not urge this
misfortune in excuse at one time, and at another virtually disavow it.
Never let _them_ take up a stone to throw at Oxford, upon this
element of a wise education; since in them, through that original vice
in their constitution, the defect of all means for secluding and
insulating their society, discipline is abolished by anticipation--
being, in fact, an impossible thing; for the walls of the college are
subservient to no purpose of life, but only to a purpose of
convenience; they converge the students for the hour or two of what is
called lecture; which over, each undergraduate again becomes _sui
juris_, is again absorbed into the crowds of the world, resorts to
whatsoever haunts he chooses, and finally closes his day at----if, in
any sense, at home--at a home which is not merely removed from the
supervision and control, but altogether from the bare knowledge, of his
academic superiors. How far this discipline is well administered in
other points at Oxford, will appear from the rest of my account. But,
thus far, at least, it must be conceded, that Oxford, by and through
this one unexampled distinction--her vast disposable fund of
accommodations for junior members within her own private cloisters--
possesses an advantage which she could not forfeit, if she would,
towards an effectual knowledge of each man's daily habits, and a
control over him which is all but absolute.

This knowledge and this control is much assisted and concentrated by
the division of the university into separate colleges. Here comes
another feature of the Oxford system. Elsewhere the university is a
single college; and this college is the university. But in Oxford the
university expresses, as it were, the army, and the colleges express
the several brigades, or regiments.

To resume, therefore, my own thread of personal narration. On the next
morning after my arrival in Oxford, I assembled a small council of
friends to assist me in determining at which of the various separate
societies I should enter, and whether as a "commoner," or as a
"gentleman commoner." Under the first question was couched the
following latitude of choice: I give the names of the colleges, and the
numerical account of their numbers, as it stood in January, 1832; for
this will express, as well as the list of that day, (which I do not
accurately know), the _proportions_ of importance amongst them.

Then, besides these colleges, five _Halls_, as they are technically
called, (the term _Hall_ implying chiefly that they are societies not
endowed, or not endowed with fellowships as the colleges are), namely:

Such being the names, and general proportions on the scale of local
importance, attached to the different communities, next comes the very
natural question, What are the chief determining motives for guiding
the selection amongst them? These I shall state. First of all, a man
not otherwise interested in the several advantages of the colleges has,
however, in all probability, some choice between a small society and a
large one; and thus far a mere ocular inspection of the list will serve
to fix his preference. For my part, supposing other things equal, I
greatly preferred the most populous college, as being that in which any
single member, who might have reasons for standing aloof from the
general habits of expense, of intervisiting, etc., would have the best
chance of escaping a jealous notice. However, amongst those "other
things" which I presumed equal, one held a high place in my estimation,
which a little inquiry showed to be very far from equal. All the
colleges have chapels, but all have not organs; nor, amongst those
which have, is the same large use made of the organ. Some preserve the
full cathedral service; others do not. Christ Church, meantime,
fulfilled _all_ conditions: for the chapel here happens to be the
cathedral of the diocese; the service, therefore, is full and
ceremonial; the college, also, is far the most splendid, both in
numbers, rank, wealth, and influence. Hither I resolved to go; and
immediately I prepared to call on the head.

The "head," as he is called generically, of an Oxford college (his
_specific_ appellation varies almost with every college--
principal, provost, master, rector, warden, etc.), is a greater man
than the uninitiated suppose. His situation is generally felt as
conferring a degree of rank not much less than episcopal; and, in fact,
the head of Brazennose at that time, who happened to be the Bishop of
Bangor, was not held to rank much above his brothers in office. Such
being the rank of heads generally, _a fortiori_, that of Christ
Church was to be had in reverence; and this I knew. He is always, _ex
officio_, dean of the diocese; and, in his quality of college head,
he only, of all deans that ever were heard of, is uniformly considered
a greater man than his own diocesan. But it happened that the present
dean had even higher titles to consideration. Dr. Cyril Jackson had
been tutor to the Prince of Wales (George IV.); he had repeatedly
refused a bishopric; and _that_, perhaps, is entitled to place a
man one degree above him who has accepted one. He was also supposed to
have made a bishop, and afterwards, at least, it is certain that lie
made his own brother a bishop. All things weighed, Dr. Cyril Jackson
seemed so very great a personage that I now felt the value of my long
intercourse with great Dons in giving me confidence to face a lion of
this magnitude.

Those who know Oxford are aware of the peculiar feelings which have
gathered about the name and pretensions of Christ Church; feelings of
superiority and leadership in the members of that college, and often
enough of defiance and jealousy on the part of other colleges. Hence it
happens that you rarely find yourself in a shop, or other place of
public resort, with a Christ-Church man, but he takes occasion, if
young and frivolous, to talk loudly of the Dean, as an indirect
expression of his own connection with this splendid college; the title
of _Dean_ being exclusively attached to the headship of Christ
Church. The Dean, as may be supposed, partakes in this superior dignity
of his "House;" he is officially brought into connection with all
orders of the British aristocracy--often with royal personages; and
with the younger branches of the aristocracy his office places him in a
relation of authority and guardianship--exercised, however, through
inferior ministry, and seldom by direct personal interference. The
reader must understand that, with rare exceptions, all the princes and
nobles of Great Britain, who choose to benefit by an academic
education, resort either to Christ Church College in Oxford, or to
Trinity College in Cambridge; these are the alternatives. Naturally
enough, my young friends were somewhat startled at my determination to
call upon so great a man; a letter, they fancied, would be a better
mode of application. I, however, who did not adopt the doctrine that no
man is a hero to his valet, was of opinion that very few men indeed are
heroes to themselves. The cloud of external pomp, which invests them to
the eyes of the _attoniti_ cannot exist to their own; they do not,
like Kehama, entering the eight gates of Padalon at once, meet and
contemplate their own grandeurs; but, more or less, are conscious of
acting a part. I did not, therefore, feel the tremor which was expected
of a novice, on being ushered into so solemn a presence.

The Dean was sitting in a spacious library or study, elegantly, if not
luxuriously furnished. Footmen, stationed as repeaters, as if at some
fashionable rout, gave a momentary importance to my unimportant self,
by the thundering tone of their annunciations. All the machinery of
aristocratic life seemed indeed to intrench this great Don's
approaches; and I was really surprised that so very great a man should
condescend to rise on my entrance. But I soon found that, if the Dean's
station and relation to the higher orders had made him lofty, those
same relations had given a peculiar suavity to his manners. Here,
indeed, as on other occasions, I noticed the essential misconception,
as to the demeanor of men of rank, which prevails amongst those who
have no personal access to their presence. In the fabulous pictures of
novels (such novels as once abounded), and in newspaper reports of
conversations, real or pretended, between the king and inferior
persons, we often find the writer expressing _his_ sense of
aristocratic assumption, by making the king address people without
their titles. The Duke of Wellington, for instance, or Lord Liverpool,
figures usually, in such scenes, as "Wellington," or "Arthur," and as
"Liverpool." Now, as to the private talk of George IV. in such cases, I
do not pretend to depose; but, speaking generally, I may say that the
practice of the highest classes takes the very opposite course. Nowhere
is a man so sure of his titles or official distinctions as amongst
_them_; for, it is upon giving to every man the very extreme
punctilio of his known or supposed claims, that they rely for the due
observance of their own. Neglecting no form of courtesy suited to the
case, they seek, in this way, to remind men unceasingly of what they
expect; and the result is what I represent--that people in the highest
stations, and such as bring them continually into contact with
inferiors, are, of all people, the least addicted to insolence or
defect of courtesy. Uniform suavity of manner is indeed rarely found,
except in men of high rank. Doubtless this may arise upon a motive of
self-interest, jealous of giving the least opening or invitation to the
retorts of ill-temper or low breeding. But, whatever be its origin,
such I believe to be the fact. In a very long conversation of a general
nature upon the course of my studies, and the present direction of my
reading, Dr. Cyril Jackson treated me just as he would have done his
equal in station and in age. Coming, at length, to the particular
purpose of my visit at this time to himself, he assumed a little more
of his official stateliness. He condescended to say that it would have
given him pleasure to reckon me amongst his flock; "But, sir," he said,
in a tone of some sharpness, "your guardians have acted improperly. It
was their duty to have given me at least one year's notice of their
intention to place you at Christ Church. At present I have not a dog-
kennel in my college untenanted." Upon this, I observed that nothing
remained for me to do but to apologize for having occupied so much of
his time; that, for myself, I now first heard of this preliminary
application; and that, as to my guardians, I was bound to acquit them
of all oversight in this instance, they being no parties to my present
scheme. The Dean expressed his astonishment at this statement. I, on my
part, was just then making my parting bows, and had reached the door,
when a gesture of the Dean's, courteously waving me back to the sofa I
had quitted, invited me to resume my explanations; and I had a
conviction at the moment that the interview would have terminated in
the Dean's suspending his standing rule in my favor. But, just at that
moment, the thundering heralds of the Dean's hall announced some man of
high rank: the sovereign of Christ Church seemed distressed for a
moment; but then recollecting himself, bowed in a way to indicate that
I was dismissed. And thus it happened that I did not become a member of
Christ Church.

A few days passed in thoughtless indecision. At the end of that time, a
trivial difficulty arose to settle my determination. I had brought
about fifty guineas to Oxford; but the expenses of an Oxford inn, with
almost daily entertainments to young friends, had made such inroads
upon this sum, that, after allowing for the contingencies incident to a
college initiation, enough would not remain to meet the usual demand
for what is called "caution money." This is a small sum, properly
enough demanded of every student, when matriculated, as a pledge for
meeting any loss from unsettled arrears, such as his sudden death or
his unannounced departure might else continually be inflicting upon his
college. By releasing the college, therefore, from all necessity for
degrading vigilance or persecution, this demand does, in effect,
operate beneficially to the feelings of all parties. In most colleges
it amounts to twenty-five pounds: in one only it was considerably less.
And this trifling consideration it was, concurring with a reputation
_at that time_ for relaxed discipline, which finally determined me
in preferring W--- College to all others. This college had the capital
disadvantage, in my eyes, that its chapel possessed no organ, and no
musical service. But any other choice would have driven me to an
instant call for more money--a measure which, as too flagrantly in
contradiction to the whole terms on which I had volunteered to
undertake an Oxford life, I could not find nerves to face.

At W---- College, therefore, I entered: and here arises the proper
occasion for stating the true costs of an Oxford education. First comes
the question of _lodging_. This item varies, as may be supposed;
but my own case will place on record the two extremes of cost in one
particular college, nowadays differing, I believe, from the general
standard. The first rooms assigned me, being small and ill-lighted, as
part of an old Gothic building, were charged at four guineas a year.
These I soon exchanged for others a little better, and for them I paid
six guineas. Finally, by privilege of seniority, I obtained a handsome
set of well-proportioned rooms, in a modern section of the college,
charged at ten guineas a year. This set was composed of three rooms;
namely, an airy bedroom, a study, and a spacious room for receiving
visitors. This range of accommodation is pretty general in Oxford, and,
upon the whole, may be taken perhaps as representing the average amount
of luxury in this respect, and at the average amount of cost. The
furniture and the fittings up of these rooms cost me about twenty-five
guineas; for the Oxford rule is, that if you take the rooms (which is
at your own option), in that case, you _third_ the furniture and
the embellishments--that is, you succeed to the total cost diminished
by one third. You pay, therefore, two guineas out of each three to your
_immediate_ predecessor. But, as he also may have succeeded to the
furniture upon the same terms, whenever there happens to have been a
rapid succession of occupants, the original cost to a remote
predecessor is sometimes brought down, by this process of diminution,
to a mere fraction of the true value; and yet no individual occupant
can complain of any heavy loss. Whilst upon this subject, I may observe
that, in the seventeenth century, in Milton's time, for example (about
1624), and for more than sixty years after that era, the practice of
_chumship_ prevailed: every set of chambers was possessed by two
cooccupants; they had generally the same bed-room, and a common study;
and they were called _chums_. This practice, once all but universal, is
now entirely extinct; and the extinction serves to mark the advance of
the country, not so much in luxury as in refinement.

The next item which I shall notice is that which in college bills is
expressed by the word _Tutorage_. This is the same in all colleges,
I believe, namely, ten guineas per annum. And this head suggests
an explanation which is most important to the reputation of Oxford,
and fitted to clear up a very extensive delusion. Some years ago,
a most elaborate statement was circulated of the number and costly
endowment of the Oxford professorships. Some thirty or more there were,
it was alleged, and five or six only which were not held as absolute
sinecures. Now, this is a charge which I am not here meaning to
discuss. Whether defensible or not, I do not now inquire. It is the
practical interpretation and construction of this charge which I here
wish to rectify. In most universities, except those of England, the
professors are the body on whom devolves the whole duty and burthen of
teaching; they compose the sole fountains of instruction; and if these
fountains fail, the fair inference is, that the one great purpose of
the institution is defeated. But this inference, valid for all other
places, is not so for Oxford and Cambridge. And here, again, the
difference arises out of the peculiar distribution of these bodies into
separate and independent colleges. Each college takes upon itself the
regular instruction of its separate inmates--of these and of no others;
and for this office it appoints, after careful selection, trial, and
probation, the best qualified amongst those of its senior members who
choose to undertake a trust of such heavy responsibility. These
officers are called Tutors; and they are connected by duties and by
accountability, not with the university at all, but with their own
private colleges. The professors, on the other hand, are _public_
functionaries, not connected (as respects the exercise of their duties)
with any college whatsoever--not even with their own--but altogether
and exclusively with the whole university. Besides the public tutors
appointed in each college, on the scale of one to each dozen or score
of students, there are also tutors strictly private, who attend any
students in search of special and extraordinary aid, on terms settled
privately by themselves. Of these persons, or their existence, the
college takes no cognizance; but between the two classes of tutors, the
most studious young men--those who would be most likely to avail
themselves of the lectures read by the professors--have their whole
time pretty severely occupied: and the inference from all this is, not
only that the course of Oxford education would suffer little if no
professors at all existed, but also that, if the existing professors
were _ex abundanti_ to volunteer the most exemplary spirit of
exertion, however much this spectacle of conscientious dealing might
edify the university, it would contribute but little to the promotion
of academic purposes. The establishment of professors is, in fact, a
thing of ornament and pomp. Elsewhere, they are the working servants;
but, in Oxford, the ministers corresponding to them bear another
name,--they are called _Tutors_. These are the working agents in the
Oxford system; and the professors, with salaries in many cases merely
nominal, are persons sequestered, and properly sequestered, to the
solitary cultivation and advancement of knowledge, which a different
order of men is appointed to communicate.

Here let us pause for one moment, to notice another peculiarity in the
Oxford system, upon the tendency of which I shall confidently make my
appeal to the good sense of all unprejudiced readers. I have said that
the _tutors_ of Oxford correspond to the _professors_ of
other universities. But this correspondence, which is absolute and
unquestionable as regards the point then at issue,--namely, where we
are to look for that limb of the establishment on which rests the main
teaching agency,--is liable to considerable qualification, when we
examine the mode of their teaching. In both cases, this is conveyed by
what is termed "lecturing;"--but what is the meaning of a lecture in
Oxford and elsewhere? Elsewhere, it means a solemn dissertation, read,
or sometimes histrionically declaimed, by the professor. In Oxford, it
means an exercise performed orally by the students, occasionally
assisted by the tutor, and subject, in its whole course, to his
corrections, and what may be called his _scholia_, or collateral
suggestions and improvements. Now, differ as men may as to other
features of the Oxford, compared with the hostile system, here I
conceive that there is no room for doubt or demur. An Oxford lecture
imposes a real, _bona fide_ task upon the student; it will not
suffer him to fall asleep, either literally or in the energies of his
understanding; it is a real drill, under the excitement, perhaps, of
personal competition, and under the review of a superior scholar. But,
in Germany, under the declamations of the professor, the young men are
often literally sleeping; nor is it easy to see how the attention can
be kept from wandering, on this plan, which subjects the auditor to no
risk of sudden question or personal appeal. As to the prizes given for
essays, etc., by the professors, these have the effect of drawing forth
latent talent, but they can yield no criterion of the attention paid to
the professor; not to say that the competition for these prizes is a
matter of choice. Sometimes it is true that examinations take place;
but the Oxford lecture is a daily examination; and, waiving _that_,
what chance is there (I would ask) for searching examinations, for
examinations conducted with the requisite _auctoritas_ (or weight of
influence derived from personal qualities), if--which may Heaven
prevent!--the German tenure of professorships were substituted for our
British one: that is, if for independent and liberal teachers were
substituted poor mercenary haberdashers of knowledge--cap in hand to
opulent students--servile to their caprices--and, at one blow,
degrading the science they profess, the teacher, and the pupil? Yet I
hear that such advice _was_ given to a Royal Commission, sent to
investigate one or more of the Scottish universities. In the German
universities, every professor holds his situation, not in his good
behavior, but on the capricious pleasure of the young men who resort to
his market. He opens a shop, in fact: others, without limit, generally
men of no credit or known respectability, are allowed to open rival
shops; and the result is, sometimes, that the whole kennel of scoundrel
professors ruin one another; each standing with his mouth open, to leap
at any bone thrown amongst them, from the table of the "Burschen;" all
hating, fighting, calumniating each other, until the land is sick of
its base knowledge-mongers, and would vomit the loathsome crew, were
any natural channel open to their instincts of abhorrence. The most
important of the Scottish professorships--those which are fundamentally
morticed to the moral institutions of the land--are upon the footing of
Oxford tutorships, as regards emoluments; that is, they are not
suffered to keep up a precarious mendicant existence, upon the alms of
the students, or upon their fickle admirations. It is made imperative
upon a candidate for admission into the ministry of the Scottish Kirk,
that he shall show a certificate of attendance through a given number
of seasons at given lectures.

The next item in the quarterly (or, technically, the _term_) bills
of Oxford is for servants. This, in my college, and, I believe, in all
others, amounted, nominally, to two guineas a year. That sum, however,
was paid to a principal servant, whom, perhaps, you seldom or never
saw; the actual attendance upon yourself being performed by one of his
deputies; and to this deputy--who is, in effect, a _factotum_,
combining in his single person all the functions of chambermaid, valet,
waiter at meals, and porter or errand-boy--by the custom of the place
and your own sense of propriety, you cannot but give something or other
in the shape of perquisites. I was told, on entering, that half a
guinea a quarter was the customary allowance,--the same sum, in fact,
as was levied by the college for his principal; but I gave mine a
guinea a quarter, thinking that little enough for the many services he
performed; and others, who were richer than myself, I dare say, often
gave much more. Yet, sometimes, it struck me, from the gratitude which
his looks testified, on my punctual payment of this guinea,--for it was
the only bill with regard to which I troubled myself to practise any
severe punctuality,--that perhaps some thoughtless young man might give
him less, or might even forget to give anything; and, at all events, I
have reason to believe that half that sum would have contented him.
These minutiae I record purposely; my immediate object being to give a
rigorous statement of the real expenses incident to an English
university education, partly as a guide to the calculations of parents,
and partly as an answer to the somewhat libellous exaggerations which
are current on this subject, in times like these, when even the truth
itself, and received in a spirit of candor the most indulgent, may be
all too little to defend these venerable seats of learning from the
ruin which seems brooding over them. Yet, no! Abominable is the
language of despair even in a desperate situation. And, therefore,
Oxford, ancient mother! and thou, Cambridge, twin-light of England! be
vigilant and erect, for the enemy stands at all your gates! Two
centuries almost have passed since the boar was within your vineyards,
laying waste and desolating your heritage. Yet that storm was not
final, nor that eclipse total. May this also prove but a trial and a
shadow of affliction! which affliction, may it prove to you, mighty
incorporations, what, sometimes, it is to us, poor, frail
_homunculi_--a process of purification, a solemn and oracular
warning! And, when that cloud is overpast, then, rise, ancient powers,
wiser and better--ready, like the _lampudćphoroi_ of old, to enter
upon a second _stadium_, and to transmit the sacred torch through
a second period of twice five hundred years. So prays a loyal _alumnus_, whose
presumption, if any be, in taking upon himself a monitory tone, is
privileged by zeal and filial anxiety.

To return, however, into the track from which I have digressed. The
reader will understand that any student is at liberty to have private
servants of his own, as many and of what denomination he pleases. This
point, as many others of a merely personal bearing, when they happen to
stand in no relation to public discipline, neither the university nor
the particular college of the student feels summoned or even authorized
to deal with. Neither, in fact, does any other university in Europe;
and why, then, notice the case? Simply thus: if the Oxford discipline,
in this particular chapter, has nothing special or peculiar about it,
yet the case to which it applies _has_, and is almost exclusively
found in our universities. On the continent it happens most rarely that
a student has any funds disposable for luxuries so eminently such as
grooms or footmen; but at Oxford and Cambridge the case occurs often
enough to attract notice from the least vigilant eye. And thus we find
set down to the credit account of other universities the non-existence
of luxury in this or other modes, whilst, meantime, it is well known to
the fair inquirer that each or all are indulgences, not at all or so
much as in idea proscribed by the sumptuary edicts of those
universities; but, simply, by the lower scale of their general
revenues. And this lower scale, it will be said--how do you account for
that? I answer, not so much by the general inferiority of continental
Europe to Great Britain in _diffusive_ wealth (though that argument
goes for something, it being notorious that, whilst immoderate
wealth, concentrated in a small number of hands, exists in various
continental states upon a larger scale than with us, moderately large
estates, on the other hand, are, with them, as one to two hundred, or
even two hundred and fifty, in comparison of ours), but chiefly upon
this fact, which is too much overlooked, that the foreign universities
are not peopled from the wealthiest classes, which are the class either
already noble, or wishing to become such. And why is that? Purely from
the vicious constitution of society on the continent, where all the
fountains of honor lie in the military profession or in the diplomatic.
We English, haters and revilers of ourselves beyond all precedent,
disparagers of our own eminent advantages beyond all sufferance of
honor or good sense, and daily playing into the hands of foreign
enemies, who hate us out of mere envy or shame, have amongst us some
hundreds of writers who will die or suffer martyrdom upon this
proposition--that aristocracy, and the spirit and prejudices of
aristocracy, are more operative (more effectually and more extensively
operative) amongst ourselves, than in any other known society of men.
Now, I, who believe all errors to arise in some narrow, partial, or
angular view of truth, am seldom disposed to meet any sincere
affirmation by a blank, unmodified denial. Knowing, therefore, that
some acute observers do really believe this doctrine as to the
aristocratic forces, and the way in which they mould English society, I
cannot but suppose that some symptoms do really exist of such a
phenomenon; and the only remark I shall here make on the case is this,
that, very often, where any force or influence reposes upon deep
realities, and upon undisturbed foundations, _there_ will be the
least heard of loquacious and noisy expressions of its power; which
expressions arise most, not where the current is most violent, but
where (being possibly the weakest) it is most fretted with resistance.

In England, the very reason why the aristocratic feeling makes itself
so sensibly felt and so distinctly an object of notice to the
censorious observer is, because it maintains a troubled existence
amongst counter and adverse influences, so many and so potent. This
might be illustrated abundantly. But, as respects the particular
question before me, it will be sufficient to say this: With us the
profession and exercise of knowledge, as a means of livelihood, is
honorable; on the continent it is not so. The knowledge, for instance,
which is embodied in the three learned professions, does, with us, lead
to distinction and civil importance; no man can pretend to deny this;
nor, by consequence, that the professors personally take rank with the
highest order of gentlemen. Are they not, I demand, everywhere with us
on the same footing, in point of rank and consideration, as those who
bear the king's commission in the army and navy? Can this be affirmed
of the continent, either generally, or, indeed, partially? I say,
_no_. Let us take Germany, as an illustration. Many towns (for
anything I know, all) present us with a regular bisection of the
resident _notables_, or wealthier class, into two distinct (often
hostile) coteries: one being composed of those who are "_noble_;"
the other, of families equally well educated and accomplished, but
_not_, in the continental sense, "noble." The meaning and value of
the word is so entirely misapprehended by the best English writers,
being, in fact, derived from our own way of applying it, that it
becomes important to ascertain its true value. A "nobility," which is
numerous enough to fill a separate ball-room in every sixth-rate town,
it needs no argument to show, cannot be a nobility in any English
sense. In fact, an _edelmann_ or nobleman, in the German sense, is
strictly what we mean by a _born gentleman_; with this one only
difference, that, whereas, with us, the rank which denominates a man
such passes off by shades so insensible, and almost infinite, into the
ranks below, that it becomes impossible to assign it any strict
demarkation or lines of separation; on the contrary, the continental
noble points to certain fixed barriers, in the shape of privileges,
which divide him, _per saltum_, from those who are below his own
order. But were it not for this one legal benefit of accurate
circumscription and slight favor, the continental noble, whether Baron
of Germany, Count of France, or Prince of Sicily and of Russia, is
simply on a level with the common landed _esquire_ of Britain, and
_not_ on a level in very numerous cases.

Such being the case, how paramount must be the spirit of aristocracy in
continental society! Our _haute noblesse_--our genuine nobility,
who are such in the general feeling of their compatriots--will do
_that_ which the phantom of nobility of the continent will not:
the spurious nobles of Germany will not mix, on equal terms, with their
untitled fellow-citizens, living in the same city and in the same style
as themselves; they will not meet them in the same ball or concert-
room. Our great territorial nobility, though sometimes forming
exclusive circles (but not, however, upon any principle of high birth),
do so daily. They mix as equal partakers in the same amusements of
races, balls, musical assemblies, with the baronets (or _elite_ of
the gentry); with the landed esquires (or middle gentry); with the
superior order of tradesmen (who, in Germany, are absolute ciphers, for
political weight, or social consideration, but, with us, constitute the
lower and broader stratum of the nobilitas, or gentry). The
obscure baronage of Germany, it is undeniable, insist upon having "an
atmosphere of their own;" whilst the Howards, the Stanleys, the
Talbots, of England; the Hamiltons, the Douglases, the Gordons, of
Scotland, are content to acknowledge a sympathy with the liberal part
of their untitled countrymen, in that point which most searchingly
tries the principle of aristocratic pride, namely, in their pleasures.
To have the same pursuits of business with another, may be a result of
accident or position; to have the same pleasures, being a matter of
choice, argues a community of nature in the _moral_ sensibilities,
in that part of our constitution which differences one man from another
in the capacities of greatness and elevation. As with their amusements,
so with their graver employments; the same mutual repulsion continues
to divide the two orders through life.

The nobles either live in gloomy seclusion upon their private funds,
wherever the privilege of primogeniture has enabled them to do so; or,
having no funds at all (the case of ninety-nine in one hundred), they
go into the army; that profession, the profession of arms, being
regarded as the only one compatible with an _edelmann's_ pretensions.
Such was once the feeling in England; such is still the feeling
on the continent. It is a prejudice naturally clinging to a
semi-barbarous (because growing out of a barbarous) state, and, in its
degree, clinging to every stage of imperfect civilization; and, were
there no other argument, this would be a sufficient one, that England,
under free institutions, has outrun the continent, in real
civilization, by a century; a fact which is concealed by the forms of
luxurious refinement in a few exclusive classes, too often usurping the
name and honors of radical civilization.

From the super-appreciation of the military profession arises a
corresponding contempt of all other professions whatsoever _paid by
fellow-citizens_, and not by the king or the state. The clerical
profession is in the most abject degradation throughout Southern
Germany; and the reason why this forces itself less imperiously upon
the public notice is, that, in rural situations, from the absence of a
resident gentry (speaking generally), the pastor is brought into rare
collision with those who style themselves _noble_; whilst, in
towns, the clergy find people enough to countenance those who, being in
the same circumstances as to comfort and liberal education, are also
under the same ban of rejection from the "nobility," or born gentry.
The legal profession is equally degraded; even a barrister or advocate
holds a place in the public esteem little differing from that of an Old
Bailey attorney of the worst class. And this result is the less liable
to modification from personal qualities, inasmuch as there is no great
theatre (as with us) for individual display. Forensic eloquence is
unknown in Germany, as it is too generally on the continent, from the
defect of all popular or open judicatures. A similar defect of
deliberative assemblies--such, at least, as represent any popular
influences and debate with open doors--intercepts the very possibility
of senatorial eloquence. That of the pulpit only
remains. But even of this--whether it be from want of the excitement
and contagious emulation from the other fields of oratory, or from the
peculiar genius of Lutheranism--no models have yet arisen that could,
for one moment, sustain a comparison with those of England or France.
The highest names in this department would not, to a foreign ear, carry
with them any of that significance or promise which surrounds the names
of Jeremy Taylor or Barrow, Bossuet or Bourdaloue, to those even who
have no personal acquaintance with their works. This absence of all
fields for gathering public distinctions cooperates, in a very powerful
way, with the contempt of the born gentry, to degrade these
professions; and this double agency is, a third time, reinforced by
those political arrangements which deny every form of state honor or
conspicuous promotion to the very highest description of excellence,
whether of the bar, the pulpit, or the civic council. Not "the fluent
Murray," or the accomplished Erskine, from the English bar--not
Pericles or Demosthenes, from the fierce democracies of Greece--not
Paul preaching at Athens--could snatch a wreath from public homage, nor
a distinction from the state, nor found an influence, nor leave behind
them an operative model, in Germany, as now constituted. Other walks of
emolument are still more despised. Alfieri, a continental "noble," that
is, a born gentleman, speaks of bankers as we in England should of a
Jewish usurer, or tricking money-changer. The liberal trades, such as
those which minister to literature or the fine arts, which, with us,
confer the station of gentleman upon those who exercise them, are, in
the estimate of a continental "noble," fitted to assign a certain rank
or place in the train and equipage of a gentleman, but not to entitle
their most eminent professors to sit down, except by sufferance, in his
presence. And, upon this point, let not the reader derive his notions
from the German books: the vast majority of German authors are not
"noble;" and, of those who are, nine tenths are liberal in this
respect, and speak the language of liberality, not by sympathy with
their own order, or as representing _their_ feelings, but in virtue
of democratic or revolutionary politics.

Such as the rank is, and the public estimation of the leading
professions, such is the natural condition of the universities which
rear them. The "nobles" going generally into the army, or leading lives
of indolence, the majority by far of those who resort to universities
do so as a means of future livelihood. Few seek an academic life in
Germany who have either money to throw away on superfluities and
external show, or who have such a rank to support as might stimulate
their pride to expenses beyond their means. Parsimony is, therefore, in
these places, the governing law; and pleasure, not less fervently wooed
than at Oxford or at Cambridge, putting off her robes of elegance and
ceremony, descends to grossness, and not seldom to abject brutality.

The sum of my argument is--that, because, in comparison of the army, no
other civil profession is, in itself, held of sufficient dignity; and
not less, perhaps, because, under governments essentially unpopular,
none of these professions has been so dignified artificially by the
state, or so attached to any ulterior promotion, either through the
state or in the state, as to meet the demands of aristocratic pride--
none of them is cultivated as a means of distinction, but originally as
a means of livelihood; that the universities, as the nurseries of these
unhonored professions, share naturally in _their_ degradation; and
that, from this double depreciation of the place and its final objects,
few or none resort thither who can be supposed to bring any extra funds
for supporting a system of luxury; that the general temperance, or
sobriety of demeanor, is far enough, however, from keeping pace with
the absence of costly show; and that, for this absence even, we are to
thank their poverty rather than their will. It is to the great honor,
in my opinion, of our own country, that those often resort to her
fountains who have no motive but that of disinterested reverence for
knowledge; seeking, as all men perceive, neither emolument directly
from university funds, nor knowledge as the means of emolument.
Doubtless, it is neither dishonorable, nor, on a large scale, possible
to be otherwise, that students should pursue their academic career
chiefly as ministerial to their capital object of a future livelihood.
But still I contend that it is for the interest of science and good
letters that a considerable body of volunteers should gather about
their banners, without pay or hopes of preferment. This takes place on
a larger scale at Oxford and Cambridge than elsewhere; and it is but a
trivial concession in return, on the part of the university, that she
should allow, even if she had the right to withhold, the privilege of
living within her walls as they would have lived at their fathers'
seats; with one only reserve, applied to all modes of expense that are,
in themselves, immoral excesses, or occasions of scandal, or of a
nature to interfere too much with the natural hours of study, or
specially fitted to tempt others of narrower means to ruinous
emulation.

Upon these principles, as it seems to me, the discipline of the
university is founded. The keeping of hunters, for example, is
unstatutable. Yet, on the other hand, it is felt to be inevitable that
young men of high spirit, familiar with this amusement, will find means
to pursue it in defiance of all the powers, however exerted, that can
properly be lodged in the hands of academic officers. The range of the
proctor's jurisdiction is limited by positive law; and what should
hinder a young man, bent upon his pleasure, from fixing the station of
his hunter a few miles out of Oxford, and riding to cover on a hack,
unamenable to any censure? For, surely, in this age, no man could
propose so absurd a thing as a general interdiction of riding. How, in
fact, does the university proceed? She discountenances the practice;
and, if forced upon her notice, she visits it with censure, and that
sort of punishment which lies within her means. But she takes no pains
to search out a trespass, which, by the mere act of seeking to evade
public display in the streets of the university, already tends to limit
itself; and which, besides, from its costliness, can never become a
prominent nuisance. This I mention as illustrating the spirit of her
legislation; and, even in this case, the reader must carry along with
him the peculiar distinction which I have pressed with regard to
English universities, in the existence of a large volunteer order of
students seeking only the liberalization, and not the profits, of
academic life. In arguing upon their case, it is not the fair logic to
say: These pursuits taint the decorum of the studious character; it is
not fair to calculate how much is lost to the man of letters by such
addiction to fox-hunting; but, on the contrary, what is gained to the
fox-hunter, who would, at any rate, be such, by so considerable a
homage paid to letters, and so inevitable a commerce with men of
learning. Anything whatsoever attained in this direction, is probably
so much more than would have been attained under a system of less
toleration. _Lucro ponamus_, we say, of the very least success in
such a case. But, in speaking of toleration as applied to acts or
habits positively against the statutes, I limit my meaning to those
which, in their own nature, are morally indifferent, and are
discountenanced simply as indirectly injurious, or as peculiarly open
to excess. Because, on graver offences (as gambling, &c.), the
malicious impeachers of Oxford must well have known that no toleration
whatsoever is practised or thought of. Once brought under the eye of
the university in a clear case and on clear evidence, it would be
punished in the most exemplary way open to a limited authority; by
_rustication_, at least--that is, banishment for a certain number
of terms, and consequent loss of these terms--supposing the utmost
palliation of circumstances; and, in an aggravated case, or in a second
offence, most certainly by final expulsion.

But it is no part of duty to serve the cause even of good morals by
impure means; and it is as difficult beforehand to prevent the
existence of vicious practices so long as men have, and ought to have,
the means of seclusion liable to no violation, as it is afterwards
difficult, without breach of honor, to obtain proof of their existence.
Gambling has been known to exist in some dissenting institutions; and,
in my opinion, with no blame to the presiding authorities. As to Oxford
in particular, no such habit was generally prevalent in my time; it is
not an English vice; nor did I ever hear of any great losses sustained
in this way. But, were it otherwise, I must hold, that, considering the
numbers, rank, and great opulence, of the students, such a habit would
impeach the spirit and temper of the age rather than the vigilance or
magisterial fidelity of the Oxford authorities. They are limited, like
other magistrates, by honor and circumstances, in a thousand ways; and
if a knot of students will choose to meet for purposes of gaming, they
must always have it in their power to baffle every honorable or
becoming attempt at detecting them. But upon this subject I shall make
two statements, which may have some effect in moderating the
uncharitable judgments upon Oxford discipline. The first respects the
age of those who are the objects of this discipline; on which point a
very grave error prevails. In the last Parliament, not once, but many
times over, Lord Brougham and others assumed that the students of
Oxford were chiefly _boys_; and this, not idly or casually, but
pointedly, and with a view to an ulterior argument; for instance, by
way of proving how little they were entitled to judge of those thirty-
nine articles to which their assent was demanded. Now, this argued a
very extraordinary ignorance; and the origin of the error showed the
levity in which their legislation was conducted. These noble lords had
drawn their ideas of a university exclusively from Glasgow. Here, it is
well known, and I mention it neither for praise nor blame, that
students are in the habit of coming at the early age of fourteen. These
may allowably be styled _boys_. But, with regard to Oxford,
eighteen is about the _earliest_ age at which young men begin
their residence: twenty and upwards is, therefore, the age of the
majority; that is, twenty is the _minimum_ of age for the vast
majority; as there must always be more men of three years' standing,
than of two or of one. Apply this fact to the question of discipline:
young men beyond twenty, generally,--that is to say, of the age which
qualifies men for seats in the national council,--can hardly, with
decency, either be called or treated as boys; and many things become
impossible as applied to _them_, which might be of easy imposition
upon an assemblage _really_ childish. In mere justice, therefore,
when speculating upon this whole subject of Oxford discipline, the
reader must carry along with him, at every step, the recollection of
that signal difference as to age, which I have now stated, between
Oxonians and those students whom the hostile party contemplate in their
arguments. Meantime, to show that, even under every obstacle
presented by this difference of age, the Oxford authorities do,
nevertheless, administer their discipline with fidelity, with
intrepidity, and with indifference as respects the high and the low, I
shall select from a crowd of similar recollections two anecdotes, which
are but trifles in themselves, and yet are not such to him who
recognizes them as expressions of a uniform system of dealing.

A great whig lord (Earl C----) happened (it may be ten years ago) to
present himself one day at Trinity (the leading college of Cambridge),
for the purpose of introducing Lord F----ch, his son, as a future
member of that splendid society. Possibly it mortified his aristocratic
feelings to hear the head of the college, even whilst welcoming the
young nobleman in courteous terms, yet suggesting, with some solemnity,
that, before taking any final resolution in the matter, his lordship
would do well to consider whether he were fully prepared to submit
himself to college discipline; for that, otherwise, it became his own
duty frankly to declare that the college would not look upon his
accession to their society as any advantage. This language arose out of
some recent experience of refractory and turbulent conduct upon the
part of various young men of rank; but it is very possible that the
noble earl, in his surprise at a salutation so uncourtly, might regard
it, in a tory mouth, as having some lurking reference to his own whig
politics. If so, he must have been still more surprised to hear of
another case, which would meet him before he left Cambridge, and which
involved some frank dealing as well as frank speaking, when a privilege
of exception might have been presumed, if tory politics, or services
the most memorable, could ever create such a privilege. The Duke of W--
--had two sons at Oxford. The affair is now long past; and it cannot
injure either of them to say, that one of the brothers trespassed
against the college discipline, in some way, which compelled (or was
thought to compel) the presiding authorities into a solemn notice of
his conduct. Expulsion appeared to be the appropriate penalty of his
offences: but, at this point, a just hesitation arose. Not in any
servile spirit, but under a proper feeling of consideration for so
eminent a public benefactor as this young nobleman's father, the rulers
paused--and at length signified to him that he was at liberty to
withdraw himself privately from the college, but also, and at the same
time, from the university. He did so; and his brother, conceiving him
to have been harshly treated, withdrew also; and both transferred
themselves to Cambridge. That could not be prevented: but there they
were received with marked reserve. One was _not_ received, I
believe, in a technical sense; and the other was received
conditionally; and such restrictions were imposed upon his future
conduct as served most amply, and in a case of great notoriety, to
vindicate the claims of discipline, and, in an extreme case, a case so
eminently an extreme one that none like it is ever likely to recur, to
proclaim the footing upon which the very highest rank is received at
the English universities. Is that footing peculiar _to them_? I
willingly believe that it is not; and, with respect to Edinburgh and
Glasgow, I am persuaded that their weight of dignity is quite
sufficient, and would be exerted to secure the same subordination from
men of rank, if circumstances should ever bring as large a number of
that class within their gates, and if their discipline were equally
applicable to the habits of students not domiciled within their walls.
But, as to the smaller institutions for education within the pale of
dissent, I feel warranted in asserting, from the spirit of the
anecdotes which have reached me, that they have not the
_auctoritas_ requisite for adequately maintaining their dignity.

So much for the aristocracy of our English universities: their glory
is, and the happiest application of their vast influence, that they
have the power to be republican, as respects their internal condition.
Literature, by substituting a different standard of rank, tends to
republican equality; and, as one instance of this, properly belonging
to the chapter of _servants_, which originally led to this
discussion, it ought to be known that the class of "servitors," once a
large body in Oxford, have gradually become practically extinct under
the growing liberality of the age. They carried in their academic dress
a mark of their inferiority; they waited at dinner on those of higher
rank, and performed other menial services, humiliating to themselves,
and latterly felt as no less humiliating to the general name and
interests of learning. The better taste, or rather the relaxing
pressure of aristocratic prejudice, arising from the vast diffusion of
trade and the higher branches of mechanic art, have gradually caused
these functions of the order (even where the law would not permit the
extinction of the order) to become obsolete. In my time, I was
acquainted with two servitors: but one of them was rapidly pushed
forward into a higher station; and the other complained of no
degradation, beyond the grievous one of exposing himself to the notice
of young women in the streets, with an untasselled cap; but this he
contrived to evade, by generally going abroad without his academic
dress. The _servitors_ of Oxford are the _sizars_ of Cambridge; and I
believe the same changes have taken place in both.

One only account with the college remains to be noticed; but this is
the main one. It is expressed in the bills by the word _battels_,
derived from the old monkish word _patella_ (or batella), a plate;
and it comprehends whatsoever is furnished for dinner and for supper,
including malt liquor, but not wine, as well as the materials for
breakfast, or for any casual refreshment to country visitors, excepting
only groceries. These, together with coals and fagots, candles, wine,
fruit, and other more trifling _extras_, which are matters of
personal choice, form so many private accounts against your name, and
are usually furnished by tradesmen living near to the college, and
sending their servants daily to receive orders. Supper, as a meal not
universally taken, in many colleges is served privately in the
student's own room; though some colleges still retain the ancient
custom of a public supper. But dinner is, in all colleges, a public
meal, taken in the refectory or "hall" of the society; which, with the
chapel and library, compose the essential public _suite_ belonging
to every college alike. No absence is allowed, except to the sick, or
to those who have formally applied for permission to give a dinner-
party. A fine is imposed on all other cases of absence. Wine is not
generally allowed in the public hall, except to the "high table," that
is, the table at which the fellows and some other privileged persons
are entitled to dine. The head of the college rarely dines in public.
The other tables, and, after dinner, the high table, usually adjourn to
their wine, either upon invitations to private parties, or to what are
called the "common rooms" of the several orders--graduates and
undergraduates, &c. The dinners are always plain, and without
pretensions--those, I mean, in the public hall; indeed, nothing
_can_ be plainer in most colleges--a simple choice between two or
three sorts of animal food, and the common vegetables. No fish, even as
a regular part of the fare; no soups, no game; nor, except on some very
rare festivity, did I ever see a variation from this plain fare at
Oxford. This, indeed, is proved sufficiently by the average amount of
the _battels_. Many men "battel" at the rate of a guinea a week: I
did so for years: that is, at the rate of three shillings a day for
everything connected with meals, excepting only tea, sugar, milk, and
wine. It is true that wealthier men, more expensive men, and more
careless men, often "battelled" much higher; but, if they persisted in
this excess, they incurred censures, more and more urgent, from the
head of the college.

Now, let us sum up; premising that the extreme duration of residence in
any college at Oxford amounts to something under thirty weeks. It is
possible to keep "short terms," as the phrase is, by a residence of
thirteen weeks, or ninety-one days; but, as this abridged residence is
not allowed, except in here and there a college, I shall assume--as
something beyond the strict _maximum_ of residence--thirty weeks
as my basis. The account will then stand thus:

This will be a liberal calculation for the college bill. What remains?
1. Candles, which the reader will best calculate upon the standard of
his own general usage in this particular. 2. Coals, which are
remarkably dear at Oxford--dearer, perhaps, than anywhere else in the
island; say, three times as dear as at Edinburgh. 3. Groceries. 4.
Wine. 5. Washing. This last article was, in my time, regulated by the
college, as there were certain privileged washer-women, between whom
and the students it was but fair that some proper authority should
interfere to prevent extortion, in return for the monopoly granted. Six
guineas was the regulated sum; but this paid for everything,--table-
linen, &c., as well as for wearing apparel; and it was understood to
cover the whole twenty-eight or thirty weeks. However, it was open to
every man to make his own arrangements, by insisting on a separate
charge for each separate article. All other expenses of a merely
personal nature, such as postage, public amusements, books, clothes,
&c., as they have no special connection with Oxford, but would,
probably, be balanced by corresponding, if not the very same, expenses
in any other place or situation, I do not calculate. What I have
specified are the expenses which would accrue to a student in
consequence of leaving his father's house. The rest would, in these
days, be the same, perhaps, everywhere. How much, then, shall we assume
as the total charge on account of Oxford? Candles, considering the
quantity of long days amongst the thirty weeks, may be had for one
shilling and sixpence a week; for few students--unless they have lived
in India, after which a physical change occurs in the sensibility of
the nostrils--are finical enough to burn wax-lights. This will amount
to two pounds, five shillings. Coals, say sixpence a day; for
threepence a day will amply feed one grate in Edinburgh; and there are
many weeks in the thirty which will demand no fire at all. Groceries
and wine, which are all that remain, I cannot calculate. But suppose we
allow for the first a shilling a day, which will be exactly ten guineas
for thirty weeks; and for the second, nothing at all. Then the extras,
in addition to the college bills, will stand thus:

The college bills, therefore, will be sixty-six pounds, nine shillings;
the extras, not furnished by the college, will be about twenty-four
pounds, six shillings,--making a total amount of ninety pounds, fifteen
shillings. And for this sum, annually, a man may defray _every_
expense incident to an Oxford life, through a period of weeks (namely,
thirty) something more than he will be permitted to reside. It is true,
that, for the _first_ year, there will be, in addition to this,
his outfit: and for _every_ year there will be his journeys. There
will also be twenty-two weeks uncovered by this estimate; but for these
it is not my business to provide, who deal only with Oxford.

That this estimate is true, I know too feelingly. Would that it were
_not_! would that it were false! Were it so, I might the better
justify to myself that commerce with fraudulent Jews which led me so
early to commence the dilapidation of my small fortune. It _is_
true; and true for a period (1804-8) far dearer than this. And to any
man who questions its accuracy I address this particular request--that
he will lay his hand upon the special item which he disputes. I
anticipate that he will answer thus: "I dispute none: it is not by
positive things that your estimate errs, but by negations. It is the
absence of all allowance for indispensable items that vitiates the
calculation." Very well: but to this, as to other things, we may apply
the words of Dr. Johnson--"Sir, the reason I drink no wine, is because
I can practise abstinence, but not temperance." Yes: in all things,
abstinence is easier than temperance; for a little enjoyment has
invariably the effect of awaking the sense of enjoyment, irritating it,
and setting it on edge. I, therefore, recollecting my own case, have
allowed for _no_ wine-parties. Let our friend, the abstraction we
are speaking of, give breakfast-parties, if he chooses to give any; and
certainly to give none at all, unless he were dedicated to study, would
seem very churlish. Nobody can be less a friend than myself to monkish
and ascetic seclusion, unless it were for twenty-three hours out of the
twenty-four.

But, however this be settled, let no mistake be made; nor let that be
charged against the system which is due to the habits of individuals.
Early in the last century, Dr. Newton, the head of a college in Oxford,
wrote a large book against the Oxford system, as ruinously expensive.
But then, as now, the real expense was due to no cause over which the
colleges could exercise any effectual control. It is due exclusively to
the habits of social intercourse amongst the young men; from which
_he_ may abstain who chooses. But, for any academic authorities to
interfere by sumptuary laws with the private expenditure of grown men,
many of them, in a legal sense, _of age_, and all near it, must
appear romantic and extravagant, for this (or, indeed, any) stage of
society. A tutor being required, about 1810, to fix the amount of
allowance for a young man of small fortune, nearly related to myself,
pronounced three hundred and twenty pounds little enough. He had this
allowance, and was ruined in consequence of the credit which it
procured for him, and the society it connected him with. The majority
have two hundred pounds a year: but my estimate stands good, for all
that.

Having stated, generally, the expenses of the Oxford system, I am
bound, in candor, to mention one variety in the mode of carrying this
system into effect, open to every man's adoption, which confers certain
privileges, but, at the same time (by what exact mode, I know not),
considerably increases the cost, and in that degree disturbs my
calculation. The great body of undergraduates, or students, are divided
into two classes--_Commoners_, and _Gentlemen Commoners_. Perhaps
nineteen out of twenty belong to the former class; and it is
for that class, as having been my own, that I have made my estimate.
The other class of _Gentlemen Commoners_ (who, at Cambridge, bear
the name of _Fellow Commoners_) wear a peculiar dress, and have
some privileges which naturally imply some corresponding increase of
cost; but why this increase should go to the extent of doubling the
total expense, as it is generally thought to do, or how it _can_
go to that extent, I am unable to explain. The differences which attach
to the rank of "Gentlemen Commoners" are these: At his entrance he pays
double "caution money;" that is, whilst Commoners in general pay about
twenty-five guineas, he pays fifty; but this can occur only once; and,
besides, in strict point of right, this sum is only a deposit, and is
liable to be withdrawn on leaving the university, though it is commonly
enough finally presented to the college in the shape of plate. The next
difference is, that, by comparison with the Commoner, he wears a much
more costly dress. The Commoner's gown is made of what is called
_prince's stuff_; and, together with the cap, costs about five
guineas. But the Gentleman Commoner has two gowns--an undress for the
morning, and a full dress-gown for the evening; both are made of silk,
and the latter is very elaborately ornamented. The cap also is more
costly, being covered with velvet instead of cloth. At Cambridge,
again, the tassel is made of gold fringe or bullion, which, in Oxford,
is peculiar to the caps of noblemen; and there are many other varieties
in that university, where the dress for "pensioners" (that is, the
Oxford "Commoners") is specially varied in almost every college; the
object being, perhaps, to give a ready means to the academic officers
for ascertaining, at a glance, not merely the general fact that such or
such a delinquent is a gownsman (which is all that can be ascertained
at Oxford), but also the particular college to which he belongs.
Allowance being made for these two items of "dress" and "caution-
money," both of which apply only to the original outfit, I know of no
others in which the expenditure of a Gentleman Commoner ought to
exceed, or could with propriety exceed, those of a Commoner. He has,
indeed, a privilege as regards the choice of rooms; he chooses first,
and probably chooses those rooms which, being best, are dearest; that
is, they are on a level with the best; but usually there are many sets
almost equally good; and of these the majority will be occupied by
Commoners. So far, there is little opening for a difference. More
often, again, it will happen that a man of this aristocratic class
keeps a private servant; yet this happens also to Commoners, and is,
besides, no properly college expense. Tutorage is charged double to a
Gentleman Commoner--namely, twenty guineas a year: this is done upon a
fiction (as it sometimes turns out) of separate attention, or aid given
in a private way to his scholastic pursuits. Finally, there arises
naturally another and peculiar source of expense to the "Gentleman
Commoner," from a fact implied in his Cambridge designation of
"_Fellow_ Commoner," _commensalis_--namely, that he associates
at meals with the "fellows" and other authorities of the college.
Yet this again expresses rather the particular shape which his
expenditure assumes than any absolute increase in its amount. He
subscribes to a regular mess, and pays, therefore, whether present or
not; but so, in a partial sense, does the Commoner, by his forfeits for
"absent commons." He subscribes also to a regular fund for wine; and,
therefore, he does not enjoy that immunity from wine-drinking which is
open to the Commoner. Yet, again, as the Commoner does but rarely avail
himself of this immunity, as he drinks no less wine than the Gentleman
Commoner, and, generally speaking, wine not worse in quality, it is
difficult to see any ground for a regular assumption of higher
expenditure in the one class than the other. However, the universal
impression favors that assumption. All people believe that the rank of
Gentleman Commoner imposes an expensive burden, though few people ever
ask why. As a matter of fact, I believe it to be true that Gentlemen
Commoners spend more by a third, or a half, than any equal number of
Commoners, taken without selection. And the reason is obvious: those
who become Gentlemen Commoners are usually determined to that course by
the accident of having very large funds; they are eldest sons, or only
sons, or men already in possession of estates, or else (which is as
common a case as all the rest put together) they are the heirs of
newly-acquired wealth--sons of the _nouveaux riches_--a class
which often requires a generation or two to rub off the insolence of a
too conscious superiority. I have called them an "aristocratic" class;
but, in strictness, they are not such; they form a privileged class,
indeed, but their privileges are few and trifling, not to add that
these very privileges are connected with one or two burdens, more than
outweighing them in the estimate of many; and, upon the whole, the
chief distinction they enjoy is that of advertising themselves to the
public as men of great wealth, or great expectations; and, therefore,
as subjects peculiarly adapted to fraudulent attempts. Accordingly, it
is not found that the sons of the nobility are much inclined to enter
this order: these, if they happen to be the eldest sons of earls, or of
any peers above the rank of viscount, so as to enjoy a title themselves
by the courtesy of England, have special privileges in both
universities as to length of residence, degrees, &c.; and their rank is
ascertained by a special dress. These privileges it is not usual to
forego; though sometimes that happens, as, in my time, in the instance
of Lord George Grenville (now Lord Nugent); he neither entered at the
aristocratic college (Christ Church), nor wore the dress of a nobleman.
Generally, however, an elder son appears in his true character of
nobleman; but the younger sons rarely enter the class of Gentlemen
Commoners. They enter either as "Commoners," or under some of those
various designations ("scholars," "demies," "students," "junior
fellows") which imply that they stand upon the foundation of the
college to which they belong, and are aspirants for academic
emoluments.

Upon the whole, I am disposed to regard this order of Gentlemen
Commoners as a standing temptation held out by authority to expensive
habits, and a very unbecoming proclamation of honor paid to the
aristocracy of wealth. And I know that many thoughtful men regard it in
the same light with myself, and regret deeply that any such
distribution of ranks should be authorized, as a stain upon the
simplicity and general manliness of the English academic laws. It is an
open profession of homage and indulgence to wealth, _as_ wealth--
to wealth disconnected from everything that might ally it to the
ancestral honors and heraldries of the land. It is also an invitation,
or rather a challenge, to profuse expenditure. Regularly, and by law, a
Gentleman Commoner is liable to little heavier burdens than a Commoner;
but, to meet the expectations of those around him, and to act up to the
part he has assumed, he must spend more, and he must be more careless
in controlling his expenditure, than a moderate and prudent Commoner.
In every light, therefore, I condemn the institution, and give it up to
the censures of the judicious. So much in candor I concede. But, to
show equal candor on the other side, it must be remembered that this
institution descends to us from ancient times, when wealth was not so
often divided from territorial or civic honors, conferring a real
precedency.

There was one reason why I sought solitude at that early age, and
sought it in a morbid excess, which must naturally have conferred upon
my character some degree of that interest which belongs to all
extremes. My eye had been couched into a secondary power of vision, by
misery, by solitude, by sympathy with life in all its modes, by
experience too early won, and by the sense of danger critically
escaped. Suppose the case of a man suspended by some colossal arm over
an unfathomed abyss,--suspended, but finally and slowly withdrawn,--it
is probable that he would not smile for years. That was my case: for I
have not mentioned, in the "Opium Confessions," a thousandth part of
the sufferings I underwent in London and in Wales; partly because the
misery was too monotonous, and, in that respect, unfitted for
description; but, still more, because there is a mysterious sensibility
connected with real suffering which recoils from circumstantial
rehearsal or delincation, as from violation offered to something
sacred, and which is, or should be, dedicated to privacy. Grief does
not parade its pangs, nor the anguish of despairing hunger willingly
count again its groans or its humiliations. Hence it was that Ledyard,
the traveller, speaking of his Russian experiences, used to say that
some of his miseries were such, that he never _would_ reveal them.
Besides all which, I really was not at liberty to speak, without many
reserves, on this chapter of my life, at a period (1821) not twenty
years removed from the actual occurrences, unless I desired to court
the risk of crossing at every step the existing law of libel, so full
of snares and man-traps, to the careless equally with the conscientious
writer. This is a consideration which some of my critics have lost
sight of in a degree which surprises me. One, for example, puts it to
his readers whether any house such as I describe as the abode of my
money-lending friend could exist "_in_ Oxford-street;" and, at the
same time, he states, as circumstances drawn from my description, but,
in fact, pure coinages of his own, certain romantic impossibilities,
which, doubtless, could as little attach to a house in Oxford-street as
they could to a house in any other quarter of London. Meantime, I had
sufficiently indicated that, whatsoever street _was_ concerned in
that affair, Oxford-street was _not_; and it is remarkable enough,
as illustrating this amiable reviewer's veracity, that no one street in
London was absolutely excluded but one; and that one, Oxford-street.
For I happened to mention that, on such a day (my birth-day), I had
turned aside _from_ Oxford-street to look at the house in question.
I will now add that this house was in Greek-street: so much it
may be safe to say. But every candid reader will see that both
prudential restraints, and also disinterested regard to the feelings of
possibly amiable descendants from a vicious man, would operate with any
thoughtful writer, in such a case, to impose reserve upon his pen. Had
my guardians, had my money-lending friend of Jewry, and others
concerned in my memoirs, been so many shadows, bodiless abstractions,
and without earthly connections, I might readily have given my own
names to my own creations, and have treated them as unceremoniously as
I pleased. Not so under the real circumstances of the case. My chief
guardian, for instance, though obstinate to a degree which risked the
happiness and the life of his ward, was an upright man otherwise; and
his children are entitled to value his memory.

Again, my Greek-street _trapexitćs_, the "_foenerator Alpheus_,"
who delighted to reap where he had not sown, and too often (I fear)
allowed himself in practices which not impossibly have long
since been found to qualify him for distant climates and "Botanic"
regions,--even he, though I might truly describe him as a mere
highwayman, whenever he happened to be aware that I had received a
friendly loan, yet, like other highwaymen of repute, and "gentle
thieves," was not inexorable to the petitions of his victim: he would
sometimes toss back what was required for some instant necessity of the
road; and at _his_ breakfast-table it was, after all, as elsewhere
recorded, that I contrived to support life; barely, indeed, and most
slenderly, but still with the final result of escaping absolute
starvation. With that recollection before me, I could not allow myself
to probe his frailties too severely, had it even been certainly safe to
do so. But enough; the reader will understand that a year spent either
in the valleys of Wales, or upon the streets of London, a wanderer, too
often houseless in both situations, might naturally have peopled the
mind of one constitutionally disposed to solemn contemplations with
memorials of human sorrow and strife too profound to pass away for
years.

Thus, then, it was--past experience of a very peculiar kind, the
agitations of many lives crowded into the compass of a year or two, in
combination with a peculiar structure of mind--offered one explanation
of the very remarkable and unsocial habits which I adopted at college;
but there was another not less powerful, and not less unusual. In
stating this, I shall seem, to some persons, covertly designing an
affront to Oxford. But that is far from my intention. It is noways
peculiar to Oxford, but will, doubtless, be found in every university
throughout the world, that the younger part of the members--the
undergraduates, I mean, generally, whose chief business must have lain
amongst the great writers of Greece and Rome--cannot have found leisure
to cultivate extensively their own domestic literature. Not so much
that time will have been wanting; but that the whole energy of the
mind, and the main course of the subsidiary studies and researches,
will naturally have been directed to those difficult languages amongst
which lie their daily tasks. I make it no subject of complaint or
scorn, therefore, but simply state it as a fact, that few or none of
the Oxford undergraduates, with whom parity of standing threw me into
collision at my first outset, knew anything at all of English
literature. The _Spectator_ seemed to me the only English book of
a classical rank which they had read; and even this less for its
inimitable delicacy, humor, and refined pleasantry in dealing with
manners and characters, than for its insipid and meagre essays, ethical
or critical. This was no fault of theirs: they had been sent to the
book chiefly as a subject for Latin translations, or of other
exercises; and, in such a view, the vague generalities of superficial
morality were more useful and more manageable than sketches of manner
or character, steeped in national peculiarities. To translate the terms
of whig politics into classical Latin, would be as difficult as it
might be for a whig himself to give a consistent account of those
politics from the year 1688. Natural, however, and excusable, as this
ignorance might be, to myself it was intolerable and incomprehensible.
Already, at fifteen, I had made myself familiar with the great English
poets. About sixteen, or not long after, my interest in the story of
Chatterton had carried me over the whole ground of the Rowley
controversy; and that controversy, by a necessary consequence, had so
familiarized me with the "Black Letter," that I had begun to find an
unaffected pleasure in the ancient English metrical romances; and in
Chaucer, though acquainted as yet only with part of his works, I had
perceived and had felt profoundly those divine qualities, which, even
at this day, are so languidly acknowledged by his unjust countrymen.
With this knowledge, and this enthusiastic knowledge of the elder
poets--of those most remote from easy access--I could not well be a
stranger in other walks of our literature, more on a level with the
general taste, and nearer to modern diction, and, therefore, more
extensively multiplied by the press.

Yet, after all--as one proof how much more commanding is that part of a
literature which speaks to the elementary affections of men, than that
which is founded on the mutable aspects of manners--it is a fact that,
even in our elaborate system of society, where an undue value is
unavoidably given to the whole science of social intercourse, and a
continual irritation applied to the sensibilities which point in that
direction; still, under all these advantages, Pope himself is less
read, less quoted, less thought of, than the elder and graver section
of our literature. It is a great calamity for an author such as Pope,
that, generally speaking, it requires so much experience of life to
enjoy his peculiar felicities as must argue an age likely to have
impaired the general capacity for enjoyment. For my part, I had myself
a very slender acquaintance with this chapter of our literature; and
what little I had was generally, at that period of my life, as, with
most men, it continues to be to the end of life, a reflex knowledge,
acquired through those pleasant miscellanies, half gossip, half
criticism--such as Warton's Essay on Pope, Boswell's Johnson, Mathias'
Pursuits of Literature, and many scores beside of the same
indeterminate class; a class, however, which do a real service to
literature, by diffusing an indirect knowledge of fine writers in their
most effective passages, where else, in a direct shape, it would often
never extend.

In some parts, then, having even a profound knowledge of our
literature, in all parts having some, I felt it to be impossible that I
should familiarly associate with those who had none at all; not so much
as a mere historical knowledge of the literature in its capital names
and their chronological succession. Do I mention this in disparagement
of Oxford? By no means. Among the undergraduates of higher standing,
and occasionally, perhaps, of my own, I have since learned that many
might have been found eminently accomplished in this particular. But
seniors do not seek after juniors; they must be sought; and, with my
previous bias to solitude, a bias equally composed of impulses and
motives, I had no disposition to take trouble in seeking any man for
any purpose.

But, on this subject, a fact still remains to be told, of which I am
justly proud; and it will serve, beyond anything else that I can say,
to measure the degree of my intellectual development. On coming to
Oxford, I had taken up one position in advance of my age by full thirty
years: that appreciation of Wordsworth, which it has taken full thirty
years to establish amongst the public, I had already made, and had made
operative to my own intellectual culture in the same year when I
clandestinely quitted school. Already, in 1802, I had addressed a
letter of fervent admiration to Mr. Wordsworth. I did not send it until
the spring of 1803; and, from misdirection, it did not come into his
hands for some months. But I had an answer from Mr. Wordsworth before I
was eighteen; and that my letter was thought to express the homage of
an enlightened admirer, may be inferred from the fact that his answer
was long and full. On this anecdote I do not mean to dwell; but I
cannot allow the reader to overlook the circumstances of the case. At
this day, it is true, no journal can be taken up which does not
habitually speak of Mr. Wordsworth as of a great if not _the_
great poet of the age. Mr. Bulwer, living in the intensest pressure of
the world, and, though recoiling continually from the judgments of the
world, yet never in any violent degree, ascribes to Mr. Wordsworth (in
his _England and the English_, p. 308) "an influence of a more
noble and purely intellectual character, than _any_ writer of our
age or nation has exercised." Such is the opinion held of this great
poet in 1835; but what were those of 1805-15,--nay, of 1825? For twenty
years after the date of that letter to Mr. Wordsworth above referred
to, language was exhausted, ingenuity was put on the rack, in the
search after images and expressions vile enough--insolent enough--to
convey the unutterable contempt avowed for all that he had written, by
the fashionable critics. One critic--who still, I believe, edits a
rather popular journal, and who belongs to that class, feeble,
fluttering, ingenious, who make it their highest ambition not to lead,
but, with a slave's adulation, to obey and to follow all the caprices
of the public mind--described Mr. Wordsworth as resembling, in the
quality of his mind, an old nurse babbling in her paralytic dotage to
sucking babies. If this insult was peculiarly felt by Mr. Wordsworth,
it was on a consideration of the unusual imbecility of him who offered
it, and not because in itself it was baser or more insolent than the
language held by the majority of journalists who then echoed the public
voice. _Blackwood's Magazine_ (1817) first accustomed the public
ear to the language of admiration coupled with the name of Wordsworth.
This began with Professor Wilson; and well I remember--nay, the proofs
are still easy to hunt up--that, for eight or ten years, this
singularity of opinion, having no countenance from other journals, was
treated as a whim, a paradox, a bold extravagance, of the
_Blackwood_ critics. Mr. Wordsworth's neighbors in Westmoreland,
who had (generally speaking) a profound contempt for him, used to rebut
the testimony of _Blackwood_ by one constant reply--"Ay, _Blackwood_
praises Wordsworth, but who else praises him?" In short, up to 1820,
the name of Wordsworth was trampled under foot; from 1820 to 1830, it
was militant; from 1830 to 1835, it has been triumphant. In 1803, when
I entered at Oxford, that name was absolutely unknown; and the finger
of scorn, pointed at it in 1802 by the first or second number of the
_Edinburgh Review_, failed to reach its mark from absolute defect of
knowledge in the public mind. Some fifty beside myself knew who was
meant by "that poet who had cautioned his friend against growing
double," etc.; to all others it was a profound secret.

These things must be known and understood properly to value the
prophetic eye and the intrepidity of two persons, like Professor Wilson
and myself, who, in 1802-3, attached themselves to a banner not yet
raised and planted; who outran, in fact, their contemporaries by one
entire generation; and did _that_ about 1802 which the rest of the
world are doing in chorus about 1832.

Professor Wilson's period at Oxford exactly coincided with my own; yet,
in that large world, we never met. I know, therefore, but little of his
policy in regard to such opinions or feelings as tended to dissociate
him from the mass of his coevals. This only I know, that he lived as it
were in public; and must, therefore, I presume, have practised a
studied reserve as to his deepest admirations; and, perhaps, at that
day (1803-8) the occasions would be rare in which much dissimulation
would be needed. Until Lord Byron had begun to pilfer from Wordsworth
and to abuse him, allusions to Wordsworth were not frequent in
conversation; and it was chiefly on occasion of some question arising
about poetry in general, or about the poets of the day, that it became
difficult to dissemble. For my part, hating the necessity for
dissimulation as much as the dissimulation itself, I drew from this
peculiarity also of my own mind a fresh reinforcement of my other
motives for sequestering myself; and, for the first two years of my
residence in Oxford, I compute that I did not utter one hundred words.

I remember distinctly the first (which happened also to be the last)
conversation that I ever held with my tutor. It consisted of three
sentences, two of which fell to his share, one to mine. On a fine
morning, he met me in the Quadrangle, and, having then no guess of the
nature of my pretensions, he determined (I suppose) to probe them.
Accordingly, he asked me, "What I had been lately reading?" Now, the
fact was, that I, at that time immersed in metaphysics, had really been
reading and studying very closely the _Parmenides_, of which
obscure work some Oxford men, early in the last century, published a
separate edition. Yet, so profound was the benignity of my nature,
that, in those days, I could not bear to witness, far less to cause,
the least pain or mortification to any human being. I recoiled, indeed,
from the society of most men, but not with any feelings of dislike. On
the contrary, in order that I _might_ like all men, I wished to
associate with none. Now, then, to have mentioned the _Parmenides_
to one who, fifty thousand to one, was a perfect stranger to its whole
drift and purpose, looked too _méchant_, too like a trick of
malice, in an age when such reading was so very unusual. I felt that it
would be taken for an express stratagem for stopping my tutor's mouth.
All this passing rapidly through my mind, I replied, without
hesitation, that I had been reading Paley. My tutor's rejoinder I have
never forgotten: "Ah! an excellent author; excellent for his matter;
only you must be on your guard as to his style; he is very vicious
_there_." Such was the colloquy; we bowed, parted, and never more
(I apprehend) exchanged one word. Now, trivial and trite as this
comment on Paley may appear to the reader, it struck me forcibly that
more falsehood, or more absolute falsehood, or more direct inversion of
the truth, could not, by any artifice of ingenuity, have been crowded
into one short sentence. Paley, as a philosopher, is a jest, the
disgrace of the age; and, as regards the two universities, and the
enormous responsibility they undertake for the books which they
sanction by their official examinations for degrees, the name of Paley
is their great opprobrium. But, on the other hand, for style, Paley is
a master. Homely, racy, vernacular English, the rustic vigor of a style
which intentionally foregoes the graces of polish on the one hand, and
of scholastic precision on the other--that quality of merit has never
been attained in a degree so eminent. This first interchange of thought
upon a topic of literature did not tend to slacken my previous
disposition to retreat into solitude; a solitude, however, which at no
time was tainted with either the moroseness or the pride of a cynic.

Neither must the reader suppose that, even in that day, I belonged to
the party who disparage the classical writers, or the classical
training of the great English schools. The Greek drama I loved and
revered. But, to deal frankly, because it is a subject which I shall
hereafter bring before the public, I made great distinctions. I was not
that indiscriminate admirer of Greek and Roman literature, which those
too generally are who admire it at all. This protesting spirit, against
a false and blind idolatry, was with me, at that time, a matter of
enthusiasm--almost of bigotry. I was a bigot against bigots. Let us
take the Greek oratory, for example:--What section of the Greek
literature is more fanatically exalted, and studiously in depreciation
of our own? Let us judge of the sincerity at the base of these hollow
affectations, by the downright facts and the producible records. To
admire, in any sense which can give weight and value to your
admiration, presupposes, I presume, some acquaintance with its object.
As the earliest title to an opinion, one way or other, of the Greek
eloquence, we ought to have studied some of its most distinguished
artists; or, say _one_, at least; and this one, we may be sure,
will be, as it ought to be, Demosthenes. Now, it is a fact, that all
the copies of Demosthenes sold within the last hundred years would not
meet the demand of one considerable town, were that orator a subject of
study amongst even classical scholars. I doubt whether, at this day,
there exist twenty men in Europe who can be said to have even once read
Demosthenes; and, therefore, it was that, when Mr. Mitford, in his
"History of Greece," took a new view of this orator's political
administration--a view which lowered his character for integrity--he
found an unresisting acceder to his doctrines in a public having no
previous opinion upon the subject, and, therefore, open to any casual
impression of malice or rash judgment. Had there been any acquaintance
with the large remains which we still possess of this famous orator, no
such wrong could have been done. I, from my childhood, had been a
reader, nay, a student of Demosthenes; and, simply, for this reason,
that, having meditated profoundly on the true laws and philosophy of
diction, and of what is vaguely denominated style, and finding nothing
of any value in modern writers upon this subject, and not much as
regards the grounds and ultimate principles even in the ancient
rhetoricians, I have been reduced to collect my opinions from the great
artists and practitioners, rather than from the theorists; and, among
those artists, in the most plastic of languages, I hold Demosthenes to
have been the greatest.

The Greek is, beyond comparison, the most plastic of languages. It was
a material which bent to the purposes of him who used it beyond the
material of other languages; it was an instrument for a larger compass
of modulations; and it happens that the peculiar theme of an orator
imposes the very largest which is consistent with a prose diction. One
step further in passion, and the orator would become a poet. An orator
can exhaust the capacities of a language--an historian, never.
Moreover, the age of Demosthenes was, in my judgment, the age of
highest development for arts dependent upon social refinement. That
generation had fixed and ascertained the use of words; whereas, the
previous generation of Thucydides, Xenophon, Plato, &c., was a
transitional period: the language was still moving, and tending to a
meridian not yet attained; and the public eye had been directed
consciously upon language, as in and for itself an organ of
intellectual delight, for too short a time, to have mastered the whole
art of managing its resources. All these were reasons for studying
Demosthenes, as the one great model and standard of Attic prose; and,
studied him I _had_, more than any other prose writer whatever.
_Paripassu_, I had become sensible that others had _not_ studied
him. One monotonous song of applause I found raised on every side;
something about being "like a torrent, that carries everything
before it." This original image is all we get in the shape of
criticism; and never any attempt even at illustrating what is greatest
in him, or characterizing what is most peculiar. The same persons who
discovered that Lord Brougham was the modern Bacon have also
complimented him with the title of the English Demosthenes. Upon this
hint, Lord Brougham, in his address to the Glasgow students, has
deluged the great Athenian with wordy admiration. There is an obvious
prudence in lodging your praise upon an object from which you count
upon a rebound to yourself. But here, as everywhere else, you look in
vain for any marks or indications of a personal and _direct_
acquaintance with the original orations. The praise is built rather
upon the popular idea of Demosthenes, than upon the real Demosthenes.
And not only so, but even upon style itself, and upon the art of
composition _in abstracto_, Lord Brougham does not seem to have
formed any clear conceptions--principles he has none. Now, it is
useless to judge of an artist until you have some principles on the
art. The two capital secrets in the art of prose composition are these:
1st, The philosophy of transition and connection, or the art by which
one step in an evolution of thought is made to arise out of another:
all fluent and effective composition depends on the _connections_;
--2dly, The way in which sentences are made to modify each other; for,
the most powerful effects in written eloquence arise out of
this reverberation, as it were, from each other in a rapid
succession of sentences; and, because some limitation is necessary to
the length and complexity of sentences, in order to make this
interdependency felt, hence it is that the Germans have no eloquence.
The construction of German prose tends to such immoderate length of
sentences, that no effect of intermodification can ever be apparent.
Each sentence, stuffed with innumerable clauses of restriction, and
other parenthetical circumstances, becomes a separate section--an
independent whole. But, without insisting on Lord Brougham's
oversights, or errors of defect, I will digress a moment to one
positive caution of his, which will measure the value of his philosophy
on this subject. He lays it down for a rule of indefinite application,
that the Saxon part of our English idiom is to be favored at the
expense of that part which has so happily coalesced with the language
from the Latin or Greek. This fancy, often patronized by other writers,
and even acted upon, resembles that restraint which some metrical
writers have imposed upon themselves--of writing a long copy of verses,
from which some particular letter, or from each line of which some
different letter, should be carefully excluded. What followed? Was the
reader sensible, in the practical effect upon his ear, of any beauty
attained? By no means; all the difference, sensibly perceived, lay in
the occasional constraints and affectations to which the writer had
been driven by his self-imposed necessities. The same chimera exists in
Germany; and so much further is it carried, that one great puritan in
this heresy (Wolf) has published a vast dictionary, the rival of
Adelung's, for the purpose of expelling every word of foreign origin
and composition out of the language, by assigning some equivalent term
spun out from pure native Teutonic materials. _Bayonet_, for
example, is patriotically rejected, because a word may be readily
compounded tantamount to _musket-dirk_; and this sort of
composition thrives showily in the German, as a language running into
composition with a fusibility only surpassed by the Greek.

But what good purpose is attained by such caprices? In three sentences
the sum of the philosophy may be stated. It has been computed (see
_Duclos_) that the Italian opera has not above six hundred words
in its whole vocabulary: so narrow is the range of its emotions, and so
little are these emotions disposed to expand themselves into any
variety of thinking. The same remark applies to that class of simple,
household, homely passion, which belongs to the early ballad poetry.
Their passion is of a quality more venerable, it is true, and deeper
than that of the opera, because more permanent and coextensive with
human life; but it is not much wider in its sphere, nor more apt to
coalesce with contemplative or philosophic thinking. Pass from these
narrow fields of the intellect, where the relations of the objects are
so few and simple, and the whole prospect so bounded, to the
immeasurable and sea-like arena upon which Shakspeare careers--co-
infinite with life itself--yes, and with something more than life. Here
is the other pole, the opposite extreme. And what is the choice of
diction? What is the _lexis_? Is it Saxon exclusively, or is it
Saxon by preference? So far from that, the Latinity is intense--not,
indeed, in his construction, but in his choice of words; and so
continually are these Latin words used, with a critical respect to
their earliest (and, where _that_ happens to have existed, to
their unfigurative) meaning, that, upon this one argument I would rely
for upsetting the else impregnable thesis of Dr. Farmer as to
Shakspeare's learning. Nay, I will affirm that, out of this regard to
the Latin acceptation of Latin words, may be absolutely explained the
Shakspearian meaning of certain words, which has hitherto baffled all
his critics. For instance, the word _modern_, of which Dr. Johnson
professes himself unable to explain the _rationale_ or principle
regulating its Shakspearian use, though he felt its value, it is to be
deduced thus: First of all, change the pronunciation a little, by
substituting for the short _o_, as we pronounce it in _modern_, the
long _o_, as heard in _modish_, and you will then, perhaps, perceive
the process of analogy by which it passed into the Shakspearian use.
The _matter_ or substance of a thing is, usually, so much more
important than its fashion or _manner_, that we have hence adopted, as
one way for expressing what is important as opposed to what is trivial,
the word _material_. Now, by parity of reason, we are entitled to
invert this order, and to express what is unimportant by some word
indicating the mere fashion or external manner of an object as opposed
to its substance. This is effected by the word _modal_ or _modern_, as
the adjective from _modus_, a fashion or manner; and in that sense
Shakspeare employs the word. Thus, Cleopatra, undervaluing to Caesar's
agent the bijouterie which she has kept back from inventory, and which
her treacherous steward had betrayed, describes them as mere trifles

where all commentators have _felt_ that modern must form the
position, mean, slight, arid inconsiderable, though perplexed to say
how it came by such a meaning. A _modern_ friend is, in the
Shakspearian sense, with relation to a real and serviceable friend,
that which the fashion of a thing is, by comparison with its substance.
But a still better illustration may be taken from a common line, quoted
every day, and ludicrously misinterpreted. In the famous picture of
life--"All the world's a stage"--the justice of the piece is described
as

which (_horrendum dictu!_) has been explained, and, I verily
believe, is generally understood to mean, _full of wise sayings and
modern illustrations_. The true meaning is--full of proverbial
maxims of conduct and of trivial arguments; that is, of petty
distinctions, or verbal disputes, such as never touch the point at
issue. The word _modern_ I have already deduced; the word
_instances_ is equally Latin, and equally used by Shakspeare in
its Latin sense. It is originally the word _instantia_, which, by
the monkish and scholastic writers, is uniformly used in the sense of
an argument, and originally of an argument urged in objection to some
previous argument.

I affirm, therefore, that Lord Brougham's counsel to the Glasgow
students is not only bad counsel,--and bad counsel for the result, as
well as for the grounds, which are either capricious or nugatory,--but
also that, in the exact proportion in which the range of thought
expands, it is an impossible counsel, an impracticable counsel--a
counsel having for its purpose to embarrass and lay the mind in
fetters, where even its utmost freedom and its largest resources will
be found all too little for the growing necessities of the intellect.
"Long-tailed words in _osity_ and _ation_!" What does _that_
describe? Exactly the Latin part of our language. Now, those
very terminations speak for themselves:--All high abstractions
end in _ation_; that is, they are Latin; and, just in proportion
as the abstracting power extends and widens, do the circles of thought
widen, and the horizon or boundary (contradicting its own Grecian name)
melts into the infinite. On this account it was that Coleridge
(_Biographia Literaria_) remarks on Wordsworth's philosophical
poetry, that, in proportion as it goes into the profound of passion and
of thought, do the words increase which are vulgarly called
"_dictionary_ words." Now, these words, these "dictionary" words,
what are they? Simply words of Latin or Greek origin: no other words,
no Saxon words, are ever called by illiterate persons dictionary words.
And these dictionary words are indispensable to a writer, not only in
the proportion by which he transcends other writers as to extent and as
to subtility of thinking, but also as to elevation and sublimity.
Milton was not an extensive or discursive thinker, as Shakspeare was;
for the motions of his mind were slow, solemn, sequacious, like those
of the planets; not agile and assimilative; not attracting all things
within its own sphere; not multiform: repulsion was the law of his
intellect--he moved in solitary grandeur. Yet, merely from this quality
of grandeur, unapproachable grandeur, his intellect demanded a larger
infusion of Latinity into his diction.

For the same reason (and, without such aids, he would have had no
proper element in which to move his wings) he enriched his diction with
Hellenisms and with Hebraisms; The case occurs in the
"Paradise Regained;" but where I do not at this moment remember. "Will
they _transact_ with God?" This is the passage; and a most flagrant
instance it offers of pure Latinism. _Transigere_, in the language
of the civil law, means to make a compromise; and the word
_transact_ is here used in that sense--a sense utterly unknown to
the English language. This is the worst case in Milton; and I do not
know that it has been ever noticed. Yet even here it may be doubted
whether Milton is not defensible; asking if they proposed to terminate
their difference with God after the fashion in use amongst courts of
law, he points properly enough to these worldly settlements by the
technical term which designated them. Thus, might a divine say: Will he
arrest the judgments of God by a _demurrer_? Thus, again, Hamlet
apostrophizes the lawyer's skull by the technical terms used in actions
for assault, &c. Besides, what proper term is there in English for
expressing a compromise? Edmund Burke, and other much older authors,
express the idea by the word _temperament_; but that word, though
a good one, was at one time considered an exotic term--equally a
Gallicism and a Latinism.] but never, as could be easy to show, without
a full justification in the result. Two things may be asserted of all
his exotic idioms--1st, That they express what could not have been
expressed by any native idiom; 2d, That they harmonize with the English
language, and give a coloring of the antique, but not any sense of
strangeness to the diction. Thus, in the double negative, "Nor did they
not perceive," &c., which is classed as a Hebraism--if any man fancy
that it expresses no more than the simple affirmative, he shows that he
does not understand its force; and, at the same time, it is a form of
thought so natural and universal, that I have heard English people,
under corresponding circumstances, spontaneously fall into it. In
short, whether a man differ from others by greater profundity or by
greater sublimity, and whether he write as a poet or as a philosopher,
in any case, he feels, in due proportion to the necessities of his
intellect, an increasing dependence upon the Latin section of the
English language; and the true reason why Lord Brougham failed to
perceive this, or found the Saxon equal to his wants, is one which I
shall not scruple to assign, inasmuch as it does not reflect personally
on Lord Brougham, or, at least, on him exclusively, but on the whole
body to which he belongs. That thing which he and they call by the
pompous name of statesmanship, but which is, in fact, _statescraft_--
the art of political intrigue--deals (like the opera) with ideas so few
in number, and so little adapted to associate themselves with other
ideas, that, possibly, in the one case equally as in the other, six
hundred words are sufficient to meet all their demands.

I have used my privilege of discursiveness to step aside from
Demosthenes to another subject, no otherwise connected with the Attic
orator than, first, by the common reference of both subjects to
rhetoric; but, secondly, by the accident of having been jointly
discussed by Lord Brougham in a paper, which (though now forgotten)
obtained, at the moment, most undue celebrity. For it is one of the
infirmities of the public mind with us, that whatever is said or done
by a public man, any opinion given by a member of Parliament, however
much out of his own proper jurisdiction and range of inquiry, commands
an attention not conceded even to those who speak under the known
privilege of professional knowledge. Thus, Cowper was not discovered to
be a poet worthy of any general notice, until Charles Fox, a most
slender critic, had vouchsafed to quote a few lines, and that, not so
much with a view to the poetry, as to its party application. But now,
returning to Demosthenes, I affirm that his case is the case of nearly
all the classical writers,--at least, of all the prose writers. It is,
I admit, an extreme one; that is, it is the general case in a more
intense degree. Raised almost to divine honors, never mentioned but
with affected rapture, the classics of Greece and Rome are seldom read,
most of them never; are they, indeed, the closet companions of any man?
Surely it is time that these follies were at an end; that our practice
were made to square a little better with our professions; and that our
pleasures were sincerely drawn from those sources in which we pretend
that they lie.

The Greek language, mastered in any eminent degree, is the very rarest
of all accomplishments, and precisely because it is unspeakably the
most difficult. Let not the reader dupe himself by popular cant. To be
an accomplished Grecian, demands a very peculiar quality of talent; and
it is almost inevitable that one who is such should be vain of a
distinction which represents so much labor and difficulty overcome. For
myself, having, as a school-boy, attained to a very unusual mastery
over this language, and (though as yet little familiar with the
elaborate science of Greek metre) moving through all the obstacles and
resistances of a Greek book with the same celerity and ease as through
those of the French and Latin, I had, in vanquishing the difficulties
of the language, lost the main stimulus to its cultivation. Still, I
read Greek daily; but any slight vanity which I might connect with a
power so rarely attained, and which, under ordinary circumstances, so
readily transmutes itself into a disproportionate admiration of the
author, in me was absolutely swallowed up in the tremendous hold taken
of my entire sensibilities at this time by our own literature. With
what fury would I often exclaim: He who loveth not his brother whom he
hath seen, how shall he love God whom he hath not seen? You, Mr. A, L,
M, O, you who care not for Milton, and value not the dark sublimities
which rest ultimately (as we all feel) upon dread realities, how can
you seriously thrill in sympathy with the spurious and fanciful
sublimities of the classical poetry--with the nod of the Olympian Jove,
or the seven-league strides of Neptune? Flying Childers had the most
prodigious stride of any horse on record; and at Newmarket that is
justly held to be a great merit; but it is hardly a qualification for a
Pantheon. The parting of Hector and Andromache--that is tender,
doubtless; but how many passages of far deeper, far diviner tenderness,
are to be found in Chaucer! Yet in these cases we give our antagonist
the benefit of an appeal to what is really best and most effective in
the ancient literature. For, if we should go to Pindar, and some other
great names, what a revelation of hypocrisy as respects the _fade_
enthusiasts for the Greek poetry!

Still, in the Greek tragedy, however otherwise embittered against
ancient literature by the dismal affectations current in the scenical
poetry, at least I felt the presence of a great and original power. It
might be a power inferior, upon the whole, to that which presides in
the English tragedy; I believed that it was; but it was equally
genuine, and appealed equally to real and deep sensibilities in our
nature. Yet, also, I felt that the two powers at work in the two forms
of the drama were essentially different; and without having read a line
of German at that time, or knowing of any such controversy, I began to
meditate on the elementary grounds of difference between the Pagan and
the Christian forms of poetry. The dispute has since been carried on
extensively in France, not less than in Germany, as between the
_classical_ and the _romantic_. But I will venture to assert
that not one step in advance has been made, up to this day. The shape
into which I threw the question it may be well to state; because I am
persuaded that out of that one idea, properly pursued, might be evolved
the whole separate characteristics of the Christian and the antique:
Why is it, I asked, that the Christian idea of _sin_ is an idea
utterly unknown to the Pagan mind? The Greeks and Romans had a clear
conception of a moral ideal, as we have; but this they estimated by a
reference to the will; and they called it virtue, and the antithesis
they called vice. The _lacheté_ or relaxed energy of the will, by
which it yielded to the seductions of sensual pleasure, that was vice;
and the braced-up tone by which it resisted these seductions was
virtue. But the idea of holiness, and the antithetic idea of sin, as a
violation of this awful and unimaginable sanctity, was so utterly
undeveloped in the Pagan mind, that no word exists in classical Greek
or classical Latin which approaches either pole of this synthesis;
neither the idea of _holiness_, nor of its correlate, _sin_,
could be so expressed in Latin as at once to satisfy Cicero and a
scientific Christian. Again (but this was some years after), I found
Schiller and Goethe applauding the better taste of the ancients, in
symbolizing the idea of death by a beautiful youth, with a torch
inverted, &c., as compared with the Christian types of a skeleton and
hour-glasses, &c. And much surprised I was to hear Mr. Coleridge
approving of this German sentiment. Yet, here again I felt the peculiar
genius of Christianity was covertly at work moving upon a different
road, and under opposite ideas, to a just result, in which the harsh
and austere expression yet pointed to a dark reality, whilst the
beautiful Greek adumbration was, in fact, a veil and a disguise. The
corruptions and the other "dishonors" of the grave, and whatsoever
composes the sting of death in the Christian view, is traced up to sin
as its ultimate cause. Hence, besides the expression of Christian
humility, in thus nakedly exhibiting the wrecks and ruins made by sin,
there is also a latent profession indicated of Christian hope. For the
Christian contemplates steadfastly, though with trembling awe, the
lowest point of his descent; since, for him, that point, the last of
his fall, is also the first of his reäscent, and serves, besides, as an
exponent of its infinity; the infinite depth becoming, in the rebound,
a measure of the infinite reäscent. Whereas, on the contrary, with the
gloomy uncertainties of a Pagan on the question of his final
restoration, and also (which must not be overlooked) with his utter
perplexity as to the nature of his restoration, if any were by accident
in reserve, whether in a condition tending downwards or upwards, it was
the natural resource to consult the general feeling of anxiety and
distrust, by throwing a thick curtain and a veil of beauty over the
whole too painful subject. To place the horrors in high relief, could
here have answered no purpose but that of wanton cruelty; whereas, with
the Christian hopes, the very saddest memorials of the havocs made by
death are antagonist prefigurations of great victories in the rear.

These speculations, at that time, I pursued earnestly; and I then
believed myself, as I yet do, to have ascertained the two great and
opposite laws under which the Grecian and the English tragedy has each
separately developed itself. Whether wrong or right in that belief,
sure I am that those in Germany who have treated the case of classical
and romantic are not entitled to credit for any discovery at all. The
Schlegels, who were the hollowest of men, the windiest and wordiest (at
least, Frederic was so), pointed to the distinction; barely indicated
it; and that was already some service done, because a presumption arose
that the antique and the modern literatures, having clearly some
essential differences, might, perhaps, rest on foundations originally
distinct, and obey different laws. And hence it occurred that many
disputes, as about the unities, etc., might originate in a confusion of
these laws. This checks the presumption of the shallow criticism, and
points to deeper investigations. Beyond this, neither the German nor
the French disputers on the subject have talked to any profitable
purpose.

I have mentioned Paley as accidentally connected with my _début_
in literary conversation; and I have taken occasion to say how much I
admired his style and its unstudied graces, how profoundly I despised
his philosophy. I shall here say a word or two more on that subject. As
respects his style, though secretly despising the opinion avowed by my
tutor (which was, however, a natural opinion for a stiff lover of the
artificial and the pompous), I would just as unwillingly be supposed to
adopt the extravagant opinions, in the other extreme, of Dr. Parr and
Mr. Coleridge. These two gentlemen, who privately hated Paley, and,
perhaps, traduced him, have hung like bees over one particular
paragraph in his Evidences, as though it were a flower transplanted
from Hymettus. Dr. Parr pronounced it the finest sentence in the
English language. It is a period (that is, a cluster of sentences)
moderately well, but not _too_ well constructed, as the German
nurses are accustomed to say. Its felicity depends on a trick easily
imitated--on a balance happily placed (namely, "_in which the wisest
of mankind would rejoice to find an answer to their doubts, and rest to
their inquiries_"). As a _bravura_, or _tour de force_, in
the dazzling fence of rhetoric, it is surpassed by many hundreds of
passages which might be produced from rhetoricians; or, to confine
myself to Paley's contemporaries, it is very far surpassed by a
particular passage in Burke's letter upon the Duke of Bedford's base
attack upon him in the House of Lords; which passage I shall elsewhere
produce, because I happen to know, on the authority of Burke's
executors, that Burke himself considered it the finest period which he
had ever written. At present, I will only make one remark, namely, that
it is always injudicious, in the highest degree, to cite for admiration
that which is not a _representative_ specimen of the author's
manner. In reading Lucian, I once stumbled on a passage of German
pathos, and of German effect. Would it have been wise, or would it have
been intellectually just, to quote this as the text of an eulogium on
Lucian? What false criticism it would have suggested to every reader!
what false anticipations! To quote a formal and periodic pile of
sentences, was to give the feeling that Paley was what the regular
rhetorical artists designate as a periodic writer, when, in fact, no
one conceivable character of style more pointedly contradicted the true
description of his merits.

But, leaving the style of Paley, I must confess that I agree with Mr.
Bulwer (_England and the English_) in thinking it shocking and
almost damnatory to an English university, the great well-heads of
creeds, moral and evangelical, that authors such in respect of doctrine
as Paley and Locke should hold that high and influential station as
teachers, or rather oracles of truth, which has been conceded to them.
As to Locke, I, when a boy, had made a discovery of one blunder full of
laughter and of fun, which, had it been published and explained in
Locke's lifetime, would have tainted his whole philosophy with
suspicion. It relates to the Aristotelian doctrine of syllogism, which
Locke undertook to ridicule. Now, a flaw, a hideous flaw, in the
_soi-disant_ detecter of flaws, a ridicule in the exposer of the
ridiculous--_that_ is fatal; and I am surprised that Lee, who
wrote a folio against Locke in his lifetime, and other examiners,
should have failed in detecting this. I shall expose it elsewhere; and,
perhaps, one or two other exposures of the same kind will give an
impetus to the descent of this falling philosophy. With respect to
Paley, and the naked _prudentialism_ of his system, it is true
that in a longish note Paley disclaims that consequence. But to this we
may reply, with Cicero, _Non quoero quid neget Epicurus, sed quid
congruenter neget_. Meantime, waiving all this as too notorious, and
too frequently denounced, I wish to recur to this trite subject, by way
of stating an objection made to the Paleyan morality in my seventeenth
year, and which I have never since seen reason to withdraw. It is
this:--I affirm that the whole work, from first to last, proceeds upon
that sort of error which the logicians call _ignoratio elenchi_,
that is, ignorance of the very question concerned--of the point at
issue. For, mark, in the very vestibule of ethics, two questions
arise--two different and disconnected questions, A and B; and Paley has
answered the wrong one. Thinking that he was answering A, and meaning
to answer A, he has, in fact, answered B. One question arises thus:
Justice is a virtue; temperance is a virtue; and so forth. Now, what is
the common principle which ranks these several species under the same
genus? What, in the language of logicians, is the common differential
principle which determines these various aspects of moral obligation to
a common genius? Another question, and a more interesting question to
men in general, is this,--What is the motive to virtue? By what
impulse, law, or motive, am I impelled to be virtuous rather than
vicious? Whence is the motive derived which should impel me to one line
of conduct in preference to the other? This, which is a practical
question, and, therefore, more interesting than the other, which is a
pure question of speculation, was that which Paley believed himself to
be answering. And his answer was,--That utility, a perception of the
resulting benefit, was the true determining motive. Meantime, it was
objected that often the most obvious results from a virtuous action
were far otherwise than beneficial. Upon which, Paley, in the long note
referred to above, distinguished thus: That whereas actions have many
results, some proximate, some remote, just as a stone thrown into the
water produces many concentric circles, be it known that he, Dr. Paley,
in what he says of utility, contemplates only the final result, the
very outermost circle; inasmuch as he acknowledges a possibility that
the first, second, third, including the penultimate circle, may all
happen to clash with utility; but then, says he, the outermost circle
of all will never fail to coincide with the absolute maximum of
utility. Hence, in the first place, it appears that you cannot apply
this test of utility in a practical sense; you cannot say, This is
useful, _ergo_, it is virtuous; but, in the inverse order, you
must say, This is virtuous, _ergo_, it is useful. You do not rely
on its usefulness to satisfy yourself of its being virtuous; but, on
the contrary, you rely on its virtuousness, previously ascertained, in
order to satisfy yourself of its usefulness. And thus the whole
practical value of this test disappears, though in that view it was
first introduced; and a vicious circle arises in the argument; as you
must have ascertained the virtuousness of an act, in order to apply the
test of its being virtuous. But, _secondly_, it now comes out that
Paley was answering a very different question from that which he
supposed himself answering. Not any practical question as to the motive
or impelling force in being virtuous, rather than vicious,--that is, to
the _sanctions_ of virtue,--but a purely speculative question, as
to the issue of virtue, or the common _vinculum_ amongst the
several modes or species of virtue (justice, temperance, etc.)--this
was the real question which he was answering. I have often remarked
that the largest and most subtle source of error in philosophic
speculations has been the confounding of the two great principles so
much insisted on by the Leibnitzians, namely, the _ratio
cognoscendi_ and the _ratio essendi_. Paley believed himself to
be assigning--it was his full purpose to assign--the _ratio
cognoscendi_; but, instead of that, unconsciously and surreptitiously,
he has actually assigned the _ratio essendi_; and, after all, a false
and imaginary _ratio essendi_.

It is remarkable--and, without a previous explanation, it might seem
paradoxical to say it--that oftentimes under a continual accession of
light important subjects grow more and more enigmatical. In times when
nothing was explained, the student, torpid as his teacher, saw nothing
which called for explanation--all appeared one monotonous blank. But no
sooner had an early twilight begun to solicit the creative faculties of
the eye, than many dusky objects, with outlines imperfectly defined,
began to converge the eye, and to strengthen the nascent interest of
the spectator. It is true that light, in its final plenitude, is
calculated to disperse all darkness. But this effect belongs to its
consummation. In its earlier and _struggling_ states, light does
but reveal darkness. It makes the darkness palpable and "visible." Of
which we may see a sensible illustration in a gloomy glass-house, where
the sullen lustre from the furnace does but mass and accumulate the
thick darkness in the rear upon which the moving figures are relieved.
Or we may see an intellectual illustration in the mind of the savage,
on whose blank surface there exists no doubt or perplexity at all, none
of the pains connected with ignorance; he is conscious of no darkness,
simply because for _him_ there exists no visual ray of speculation--no
vestige of prelusive light.

Similar, and continually more similar, has been the condition of
ancient history. Once yielding a mere barren crop of facts and dates,
slowly it has been kindling of late years into life and deep interest
under superior treatment. And hitherto, as the light has advanced,
_pari passu_ have the masses of darkness strengthened. Every
question solved has been the parent of three new questions unmasked.
And the power of breathing life into dry bones has but seemed to
multiply the skeletons and lifeless remains; for the very natural
reason--that these dry bones formerly (whilst viewed as incapable of
revivification) had seemed less numerous, because everywhere confounded
to the eye with stocks and stones, so long as there was no motive of
hope for marking the distinction between them.

Amongst all the illustrations which might illuminate this truth, none
is so instructive as the large question of PAGAN ORACLES. Every part,
indeed, of the Pagan religion, the course, geographically or
ethnographically, of its traditions, the vast labyrinth of its
mythology, the deductions of its contradictory genealogies, the
disputed meaning of its many secret "mysteries" [_teletai_--
symbolic rites or initiations], all these have been submitted of late
years to the scrutiny of glasses more powerful, applied under more
combined arrangements, and directed according to new principles more
comprehensively framed. We cannot in sincerity affirm--always with
immediate advantage. But even where the individual effort may have been
a failure as regarded the immediate object, rarely, indeed, it has
happened but that much indirect illumination has resulted--which,
afterwards entering into combination with other scattered currents of
light, has issued in discoveries of value; although, perhaps, any one
contribution, taken separately, had been, and would have remained,
inoperative. Much has been accomplished, chiefly of late years; and,
confining our view to ancient history, almost exclusively amongst the
Germans--by the Savignys, the Niebuhrs, the Otfried Muellers. And, if
that _much_ has left still more to do, it has also brought the
means of working upon a scale of far accelerated speed.

The books now existing upon the ancient oracles, above all, upon the
Greek oracles, amount to a small library. The facts have been collected
from all quarters,--examined, sifted, winnowed. Theories have been
raised upon these facts under every angle of aspect; and yet, after
all, we profess ourselves to be dissatisfied. Amongst much that is
sagacious, we feel and we resent with disgust a taint of falsehood
diffused over these recent speculations from vulgar and even
counterfeit incredulity; the one gross vice of German philosophy, not
less determinate or less misleading than that vice which, heretofore,
through many centuries, had impoverished this subject, and had stopped
its discussion under the anile superstition of the ecclesiastical
fathers.

These fathers, both Greek and Latin, had the ill fortune to be
extravagantly esteemed by the church of Rome; whence, under a natural
reaction, they were systematically depreciated by the great leaders of
the Protestant Reformation. And yet hardly in a corresponding degree.
For there was, after all, even among the reformers, a deep-seated
prejudice in behalf of all that was "primitive" in Christianity; under
which term, by some confusion of ideas, the fathers often benefited.
Primitive Christianity was reasonably venerated; and, on this argument,
that, for the first three centuries, it was necessarily more sincere.
We do not think so much of that sincerity which affronted the fear of
persecution; because, after all, the searching persecutions were rare
and intermitting, and not, perhaps, in any case, so fiery as they have
been represented. We think more of that gentle but insidious
persecution which lay in the solicitations of besieging friends, and
more still of the continual temptations which haunted the irresolute
Christian in the fascinations of the public amusements. The theatre,
the circus, and, far beyond both, the cruel amphitheatre, constituted,
for the ancient world, a passionate enjoyment, that by many authors,
and especially through one period of time, is described as going to the
verge of frenzy. And we, in modern times, are far too little aware in
what degree these great carnivals, together with another attraction of
great cities, the pomps and festivals of the Pagan worship, broke the
monotony of domestic life, which, for the old world, was even more
oppressive than it is for us. In all principal cities, so as to be
within the reach of almost all provincial inhabitants, there was a
hippodrome, often uniting the functions of the circus and the
amphitheatre; and there was a theatre. From all such pleasures the
Christian was sternly excluded by his very profession of faith. From
the festivals of the Pagan religion his exclusion was even more
absolute; against them he was a sworn militant protester from the hour
of his baptism. And when these modes of pleasurable relaxation had been
subtracted from ancient life, what could remain? Even less, perhaps,
than most readers have been led to consider. For the ancients had no
such power of extensive locomotion, of refreshment for their wearied
minds, by travelling and change of scene, as we children of modern
civilization possess. No ships had then been fitted up for passengers,
nor public carriages established, nor roads opened extensively, nor
hotels so much as imagined hypothetically; because the relation of
_xenia_, or the obligation to reciprocal hospitality, and latterly
the Roman relation of patron and client, had stifled the first motions
of enterprise of the ancients; in fact, no man travelled but the
soldier, and the man of political authority. Consequently, in
sacrificing public amusements, the Christians sacrificed _all_
pleasure whatsoever that was not rigorously domestic; whilst in facing
the contingencies of persecutions that might arise under the rapid
succession of changing emperors, they faced a perpetual _anxiety_
more trying to the fortitude than any fixed and measurable evil. Here,
certainly, we have a guarantee for the deep faithfulness of early
Christians, such as never can exist for more mixed bodies of
professors, subject to no searching trials.

Better the primitive Christians were (by no means individually better,
but better on the total body), yet they were not in any intellectual
sense wiser. Unquestionably the elder Christians participated in the
local follies, prejudices, superstitions, of their several provinces
and cities, except where any of these happened to be too conspicuously
at war with the spirit of love or the spirit of purity which exhaled at
every point from the Christian faith; and, in all intellectual
features, as were the Christians generally, such were the fathers.
Amongst the Greek fathers, one might be unusually learned, as Clement
of Alexandria; and another might be reputed unusually eloquent, as
Gregory Nazianzen, or Basil. Amongst the Latin fathers, one might be a
man of admirable genius, as far beyond the poor, vaunted Rousseau in
the impassioned grandeur of his thoughts, as he was in truth and purity
of heart; we speak of St. Augustine (usually called St. Austin), and
many might be distinguished by various literary merits. But could these
advantages anticipate a higher civilization? Most unquestionably some
of the fathers were the _élite_ of their own age, but not in
advance of their age. They, like all their contemporaries, were
besieged by errors, ancient, inveterate, traditional; and accidentally,
from one cause special to themselves, they were not merely liable to
error, but usually prone to error. This cause lay in the _polemic_
form which so often they found a necessity, or a convenience, or a
temptation for assuming, as teachers or defenders of the truth.

He who reveals a body of awful truth to a candid and willing auditory
is content with the grand simplicities of truth in the quality of his
proofs. And truth, where it happens to be of a high order, is generally
its own witness to all who approach it in the spirit of childlike
docility. But far different is the position of that teacher who
addresses an audience composed in various proportions of sceptical
inquirers, obstinate opponents, and malignant scoffers. Less than an
apostle is unequal to the suppression of all human reactions incident
to wounded sensibilities. Scorn is too naturally met by retorted scorn:
malignity in the Pagan, which characterized all the known cases of
signal opposition to Christianity, could not but hurry many good men
into a vindictive pursuit of victory. Generally, where truth is
communicated _polemically_ (this is, not as it exists in its own
inner simplicity, but as it exists in external relation to error), the
temptation is excessive to use those arguments which will tell at the
moment upon the crowd of bystanders, by preference to those which will
approve themselves ultimately to enlightened disciples. Hence it is,
that, like the professional rhetoricians of Athens, not seldom the
Christian fathers, when urgently pressed by an antagonist equally
mendacious and ignorant, could not resist the human instinct for
employing arguments such as would baffle and confound the unprincipled
opponent, rather than such as would satisfy the mature Christian. If a
man denied himself all specious arguments, and all artifices of
dialectic subtlety, he must renounce the hopes of a _present_
triumph; for the light of absolute truth on moral or on spiritual
themes is too dazzling to be sustained by the diseased optics of those
habituated to darkness. And hence we explain not only the many gross
delusions of the fathers, their sophisms, their errors of fact and
chronology, their attempts to build great truths upon fantastic
etymologies, or upon popular conceits in science that have long since
exploded, but also their occasional unchristian tempers. To contend
with an unprincipled and malicious liar, such as Julian the Apostate,
in its original sense the first deliberate _miscreant_, offered a
dreadful snare to any man's charity. And he must be a furious bigot who
will justify the rancorous lampoons of Gregory Nazianzen. Are we, then,
angry on behalf of Julian? So far as _he_ was interested, not for
a moment would we have suspended the descending scourge. Cut him to the
bone, we should have exclaimed at the time! Lay the knout into every
"raw" that can be found! For we are of opinion that Julian's duplicity
is not yet adequately understood. But what was right as regarded the
claims of the criminal, was _not_ right as regarded the duties of
his opponent. Even in this mischievous renegade, trampling with his
orangoutang hoofs the holiest of truths, a Christian bishop ought still
to have respected his sovereign, through the brief period that he
_was_ such, and to have commiserated his benighted brother,
however wilfully astray, and however hatefully seeking to quench that
light for other men, which, for his own misgiving heart, we could
undertake to show that he never _did_ succeed in quenching. We do
not wish to enlarge upon a theme both copious and easy. But here, and
everywhere, speaking of the fathers as a body, we charge them with
anti-christian practices of a two-fold order: sometimes as supporting
their great cause in a spirit alien to its own, retorting in a temper
not less uncharitable than that of their opponents; sometimes, again,
as adopting arguments that are unchristian in their ultimate grounds;
resting upon errors the reputation of errors; upon superstitions the
overthrow of superstitions; and drawing upon the armories of darkness
for weapons that, to be durable, ought to have been of celestial
temper. Alternately, in short, the fathers trespass against those
affections which furnish to Christianity its moving powers, and against
those truths which furnish to Christianity its guiding lights. Indeed,
Milton's memorable attempt to characterize the fathers as a body,
contemptuous as it is, can hardly be challenged as overcharged.

Never in any instance were these aberrations of the fathers more
vividly exemplified than in their theories upon the Pagan Oracles. On
behalf of God, they were determined to be wiser than God; and, in
demonstration of scriptural power, to advance doctrines which the
Scriptures had nowhere warranted. At this point, however, we shall take
a short course; and, to use a vulgar phrase, shall endeavor to "kill
two birds with one stone." It happens that the earliest book in our
modern European literature, which has subsequently obtained a station
of authority on the subject of the ancient Oracles, applied itself
entirely to the erroneous theory of the fathers. This is the celebrated
_Antonii Van Dale, "De Ethnicorum Oraculis Dissertationes_," which
was published at Amsterdam _at least_ as early as the year 1682;
that is, one hundred and sixty years ago. And upon the same subject
there has been no subsequent book which maintains an equal rank. Van
Dale might have treated his theme simply with a view to the
investigation of the truth, as some recent inquirers have preferred
doing; and, in that case, the fathers would have been noticed only as
incidental occasions might bring forward their opinions--true or false.
But to this author the errors of the fathers seemed capital; worthy, in
fact, of forming his _principal_ object; and, knowing their great
authority in the Papal church, he anticipated, in the plan of attaching
his own views to the false views of the fathers, an opening to a double
patronage--that of the Protestants, in the first place, as interested
in all doctrines seeming to be anti-papal; that of the sceptics, in the
second place, as interested in the exposure of whatever had once
commanded, but subsequently lost, the superstitious reverence of
mankind. On this policy, he determined to treat the subject
polemically. He fastened, therefore, upon the fathers with a deadly
_acharnement_, that evidently meant to leave no arrears of work
for any succeeding assailant; and it must be acknowledged that, simply
in relation to this purpose of hostility, his work is triumphant. So
much was not difficult to accomplish; for barely to enunciate the
leading doctrine of the fathers is, in the ear of any chronologist, to
overthrow it. But, though successful enough in its functions of
destruction, on the other hand, as an affirmative or constructive work,
the long treatise of Van Dale is most unsatisfactory. It leaves us with
a hollow sound ringing in the ear, of malicious laughter from gnomes
and imps grinning over the weaknesses of man--his paralytic facility in
believing--his fraudulent villany in abusing this facility--but in no
point accounting for those real effects of diffusive social benefits
from the Oracle machinery, which must arrest the attention of candid
students, amidst some opposite monuments of incorrigible credulity, or
of elaborate imposture.

As a book, however, belonging to that small cycle (not numbering,
perhaps, on _all_ subjects, above three score), which may be said
to have moulded and controlled the public opinion of Europe through the
last five generations, already for itself the work of Van Dale merits a
special attention. It is confessedly the _classical_ book--the
original _fundus_ for the arguments and facts applicable to this
question; and an accident has greatly strengthened its authority.
Fontenelle, the most fashionable of European authors, at the opening of
the eighteenth century, writing in a language at that time even more
predominant than at present, did in effect employ all his advantages to
propagate and popularize the views of Van Dale. Scepticism naturally
courts the patronage of France; and in effect that same remark which a
learned Belgian (Van Brouwer) has found frequent occasion to make upon
single sections of Fontenelle's work, may be fairly extended into a
representative account of the whole--"_L'on trouve les męmes
arguments chez Fontenelle, mais dégagés des longueurs du savant Van
Dale, et exprimés avec plus d'élégance._" This _rifaccimento_
did not injure the original work in reputation: it caused Van Dale to
be less read, but to be more esteemed; since a man confessedly
distinguished for his powers of composition had not thought it beneath
his ambition to adopt and recompose Van Dale's theory. This important
position of Van Dale with regard to the effectual creed of Europe--so
that, whether he were read directly or were slighted for a more
fashionable expounder, equally in either case it was _his_ doctrines
which prevailed--must always confer a circumstantial value upon the
original dissertations, "_De Ethnicorum Oraculis_."

This original work of Van Dale is a book of considerable extent. But,
in spite of its length, it divides substantially into two great
chapters, and no more, which coincide, in fact, with the two separate
dissertations. The first of these dissertations, occupying one hundred
and eighty-one pages, inquires into the failure and extinction of the
Oracles; when they failed, and under what circumstances. The second of
these dissertations inquires into the machinery and resources of the
Oracles during the time of their prosperity. In the first dissertation,
the object is to expose the folly and gross ignorance of the fathers,
who insisted on representing the history of the case roundly in this
shape--as though all had prospered with the Oracles up to the nativity
of Christ; but that, after his crucifixion, and simultaneously with the
first promulgation of Christianity, all Oracles had suddenly drooped;
or, to tie up their language to the rigor of their theory, had suddenly
expired. All this Van Dale peremptorily denies; and, in these days, it
is scarcely requisite to add, triumphantly denies; the whole hypothesis
of the fathers having literally not a leg to stand upon; and being, in
fact, the most audacious defiance to historical records that, perhaps,
the annals of human folly present.

In the second dissertation, Van Dale combats the other notion of the
fathers--that, during their prosperous ages, the Oracles had moved by
an agency of evil spirits. He, on the contrary, contends that, from the
first hour to the last of their long domination over the minds and
practice of the Pagan world, they had moved by no agencies whatever,
but those of human fraud, intrigue, collusion, applied to human
blindness, credulity, and superstition.

We shall say a word or two upon each question. As to the first, namely,
_when_ it was that the Oracles fell into decay and silence, thanks
to the headlong rashness of the Fathers, Van Dale's assault cannot be
refused or evaded. In reality, the evidence against them is too
flagrant and hyperbolical. If we were to quote from Juvenal--"Delphis
et Oracula cessant," in that case, the fathers challenge it as an
argument on _their_ side, for that Juvenal described a state of
things immediately posterior to Christianity; yet even here the word
_cessant_ points to a distinction of cases which already in itself
is fatal to their doctrine. By _cessant_ Juvenal means evidently
what we, in these days, should mean in saying of a ship in action that
her fire was slackening. This powerful poet, therefore, wiser so far
than the Christian fathers, distinguishes two separate cases: first,
the state of torpor and languishing which might be (and in fact was)
the predicament of many famous Oracles through centuries not fewer than
five, six, or even eight; secondly, the state of absolute dismantling
and utter extinction which, even before his time, had confounded
individual Oracles of the inferior class, not from changes affecting
religion, whether true or false, but from political revolutions. Here,
therefore, lies the first blunder of the fathers, that they confound
with total death the long drooping which befell many great Oracles from
languor in the popular sympathies, under changes hereafter to be
noticed; and, consequently, from revenues and machinery continually
decaying. That the Delphic Oracle itself--of all oracles the most
illustrious--had not expired, but simply slumbered for centuries, the
fathers might have been convinced themselves by innumerable passages in
authors contemporary with themselves; and that it was continually
throwing out fitful gleams of its ancient power, when any very great
man (suppose a Caesar) thought fit to stimulate its latent vitality, is
notorious from such cases as that of Hadrian. He, in his earlier days,
whilst yet only dreaming of the purple, had not found the Oracle
superannuated or palsied. On the contrary, he found it but too clear-
sighted; and it was no contempt in him, but too ghastly a fear and
jealousy, which labored to seal up the grander ministrations of the
Oracle for the future. What the Pythia had foreshown to himself, she
might foreshow to others; and, when tempted by the same princely
bribes, she might authorize and kindle the same aspiring views in other
great officers. Thus, in the new condition of the Roman power, there
was a perpetual peril, lest an oracle, so potent as that of Delphi,
should absolutely create rebellions, by first suggesting hopes to men
in high commands. Even as it was, all treasonable assumptions of the
purple, for many generations, commenced in the hopes inspired by
auguries, prophecies, or sortileges. And had the great Delphic Oracle,
consecrated to men's feelings by hoary superstition, and _privileged
by secrecy_, come forward to countersign such hopes, many more would
have been the wrecks of ambition, and even bloodier would have been the
blood-polluted line of the imperial successions. Prudence, therefore,
it was, and state policy, not the power of Christianity, which gave the
_final_ shock (of the _original_ shock we shall speak elsewhere)
to the grander functions of the Delphic Oracle. But, in the mean
time, the humbler and more domestic offices of this oracle, though
naturally making no noise at a distance, seem long to have survived its
state relations. And, apart from the sort of galvanism notoriously
applied by Hadrian, surely the fathers could not have seen Plutarch's
account of its condition, already a century later than our Saviour's
nativity. The Pythian priestess, as we gather from _him_, had by
that time become a less select and dignified personage; she was no
longer a princess in the land--a change which was proximately due to
the impoverished income of the temple; but she was still in existence;
still held in respect; still trained, though at inferior cost, to her
difficult and showy ministrations. And the whole establishment of the
Delphic god, if necessarily contracted from that scale which had been
suitable when great kings and commonwealths were constant suitors
within the gates of Delphi, still clung (like the Venice of modern
centuries) to her old ancestral honors, and kept up that decent
household of ministers which corresponded to the altered ministrations
of her temple. In fact, the evidences on behalf of Delphi as a princely
house, that had indeed partaken in the decaying fortunes of Greece, but
naturally was all the prouder from the irritating contrast of her great
remembrances, are so plentifully dispersed through books, that the
fathers must have been willingly duped. That in some way they
_were_ duped is too notorious from the facts, and might be suspected
even from their own occasional language; take, as one instance, amongst
a whole _harmony_ of similar expressions, this short passage from
Eusebius--_hoi Hellenes homologentes ekleloipenai auton ta chresteria_:
the Greeks admitting that their Oracles have failed. (There is,
however, a disingenuous vagueness in the very word _ekleloipenai_),
_ed' allote pote ex aionos_--and when? why, at no other crisis through
the total range of their existence--_e kata tes chrones tes euangelikes
didaskalias_--than precisely at the epoch of the evangelical
dispensation, etc. Eusebius was a man of too extensive reading to be
entirely satisfied with the Christian representations upon this point.
And in such indeterminate phrases as _kata tes chrones_ (which might
mean indifferently the entire three centuries then accomplished from
the first promulgation of Christianity, or specifically that narrow
punctual limit of the earliest promulgation), it is easy to trace an
ambidextrous artifice of compromise between what would satisfy his own
brethren, on the one hand, and what, on the other hand, he could hope
to defend against the assaults of learned Pagans.

In particular instances it is but candid to acknowledge that the
fathers may have been misled by the remarkable tendencies to error
amongst the ancients, from their want of public journals, combined with
territorial grandeur of empire. The greatest possible defect of harmony
arises naturally in this way amongst ancient authors, locally remote
from each other; but more especially in the post-christian periods,
when reporting any aspects of change, or any results from a revolution
variable and advancing under the vast varieties of the Roman empire.
Having no newspapers to effect a level amongst the inequalities and
anomalies of their public experience in regard to the Christian
revolution, when collected from innumerable tribes so widely differing
as to civilization, knowledge, superstition, &c.; hence it happened
that one writer could report with truth a change as having occurred
within periods of ten to sixty years, which for some other province
would demand a circuit of six hundred. For example, in Asia Minor, all
the way from the sea coast to the Euphrates, towns were scattered
having a dense population of Jews. Sometimes these were the most
malignant opponents of Christianity; that is, wherever they happened to
rest in the _letter_ of their peculiar religion. But, on the other
hand, where there happened to be a majority (or, if not numerically a
majority, yet influentially an overbalance) in that section of the Jews
who were docile children of their own preparatory faith and discipline,
no bigots, and looking anxiously for the fulfilment of their prophecies
(an expectation at that time generally diffused),--under those
circumstances, the Jews were such ready converts as to account
naturally for sudden local transitions, which in other circumstances or
places might not have been credible.

This single consideration may serve to explain the apparent
contradictions, the irreconcilable discrepancies, between the
statements of contemporary Christian bishops, locally at a vast
distance from each other, or (which is even more important) reporting
from communities occupying different stages of civilization. There was
no harmonizing organ of interpretation, in Christian or in Pagan
newspapers, to bridge over the chasms that divided different provinces.
A devout Jew, already possessed by the purest idea of the Supreme
Being, stood on the very threshold of conversion: he might, by one
hour's conversation with an apostle, be transfigured into an
enlightened Christian; whereas a Pagan could seldom in one generation
pass beyond the infirmity of his novitiate. His heart and affections,
his will and the habits of his understanding, were too deeply diseased
to be suddenly transmuted. And hence arises a phenomenon, which has too
languidly arrested the notice of historians; namely, that already, and
for centuries before the time of Constantine, wherever the Jews had
been thickly sown as colonists, the most potent body of Christian zeal
stood ready to kindle under the first impulse of encouragement from the
state; whilst in the great capitals of Rome and Alexandria, where the
Jews were hated and neutralized politically by Pagan forces, not for a
hundred years later than Constantine durst the whole power of the
government lay hands on the Pagan machinery, except with timid
precautions, and by graduations so remarkably adjusted to the
circumstances, that sometimes they wear the shape of compromises with
idolatry. We must know the ground, the quality of the population,
concerned in any particular report of the fathers, before we can judge
of its probabilities. Under local advantages, insulated cases of
Oracles suddenly silenced, of temples and their idol-worship
overthrown, as by a rupture of new-born zeal, were not less certain to
arise as rare accidents from rare privileges, or from rare coincidences
of unanimity in the leaders of the place, than on the other hand they
were certain _not_ to arise in that unconditional universality
pretended by the fathers. Wheresoever Paganism was interwoven with the
whole moral being of a people, as it was in Egypt, or with the
political tenure and hopes of a people, as it was in Rome, _there_
a long struggle was inevitable before the revolution could be effected.
Briefly, as against the fathers, we find a sufficient refutation in
what _followed_ Christianity. If, at a period five, or even six
hundred years after the birth of Christ, you find people still
consulting the local Oracles of Egypt, in places sheltered from the
point-blank range of the state artillery,--there is an end, once and
forever, to the delusive superstition that, merely by its silent
presence in the world, Christianity must instantaneously come into
fierce activity as a reägency of destruction to all forms of idolatrous
error. That argument is multiplied beyond all power of calculation; and
to have missed it is the most eminent instance of wilful blindness
which the records of human folly can furnish. But there is another
refutation lying in an opposite direction, which presses the fathers
even more urgently in the rear than this presses them in front; any
author posterior to Christianity, who should point to the decay of
Oracles, they would claim on their own side. But what would they have
said to Cicero,--by what resource of despair would they have parried
his authority, when insisting (as many times he does insist), forty and
even fifty years before the birth of Christ, on the languishing
condition of the Delphic Oracle? What evasion could they imagine here?
How could that languor be due to Christianity, which far anticipated
the very birth of Christianity? For, as to Cicero, who did not "far
anticipate the birth of Christianity." we allege _him_ rather
because his work _De Divinatione_ is so readily accessible, and
because his testimony on any subject is so full of weight, than because
other and much older authorities cannot be produced to the same effect.
The Oracles of Greece had lost their vigor and their palmy pride full
two centuries before the Christian era. Historical records show this
_ŕ posteriori_, whatever were the cause; and the cause, which we
will state hereafter, shows it _ŕ priori_, apart from the records.

Surely, therefore, Van Dale needed not to have pressed his victory over
the helpless fathers so unrelentingly, and after the first ten pages by
cases and proofs that are quite needless and _ex abundanti_;
simply the survival of any one distinguished Oracle upwards of four
centuries _after_ Christ--that is sufficient. But if with this
fact we combine the other fact, that all the principal Oracles had
already begun to languish, more than two centuries _before_
Christianity, there can be no opening for a whisper of dissent upon any
real question between Van Dale and his opponents; namely, both as to
the possibility of Christianity coexisting with such forms of error,
and the possibility that oracles should be overthrown by merely Pagan,
or internal changes. The less plausible, however, that we find this
error of the fathers, the more curiosity we naturally feel about the
source of that error; and the more so, because Van Dale never turns his
eyes in that direction.

This source lay (to speak the simple truth) in abject superstition. The
fathers conceived of the enmity between Christianity and Paganism, as
though it resembled that between certain chemical poisons and the
Venetian wine-glass, which (according to the belief of
three centuries back) no sooner received any poisonous fluid, than
immediately it shivered into crystal splinters. They thought to honor
Christianity, by imaging it as some exotic animal of more powerful
breed, such as we English have witnessed in a domestic case, coming
into instant collision with the native race, and exterminating it
everywhere upon the first conflict. In this conceit they substituted a
foul fiction of their own, fashioned on the very model of Pagan
fictions, for the unvarying analogy of the divine procedure.
Christianity, as the last and consummate of revelations, had the high
destination of working out its victory through what was greatest in a
man--through his reason, his will, his affections. But, to satisfy the
fathers, it must operate like a drug--like sympathetic powders--like an
amulet--or like a conjurer's charm. Precisely the monkish effect of a
Bible when hurled at an evil spirit--not the true rational effect of
that profound oracle read, studied, and laid to heart--was that which
the fathers ascribed to the mere proclamation of Christianity, when
first piercing the atmosphere circumjacent to any oracle; and, in fact,
to their gross appreciations, Christian truth was like the scavenger
bird in Eastern climates, or the stork in Holland, which signalizes its
presence by devouring all the native brood of vermin, or nuisances, as
fast as they reproduce themselves under local distemperatures of
climate or soil.

It is interesting to pursue the same ignoble superstition, which, in
fact, under Romish hands, soon crept like a parasitical plant over
Christianity itself, until it had nearly strangled its natural vigor,
back into times far preceding that of the fathers. Spite of all that
could be wrought by Heaven, for the purpose of continually confounding
the local vestiges of popular reverence which might have gathered round
stocks and stones, so obstinate is the hankering after this mode of
superstition in man that his heart returns to it with an elastic recoil
as often as the openings are restored. Agreeably to this infatuation,
the temple of the true God--even its awful _adytum_--the holy of
holies--or the places where the ark of the covenant had rested in its
migrations--all were conceived to have an eternal and a self-
vindicating sanctity. So thought man: but God himself, though to man's
folly pledged to the vindication of his own sanctities, thought far
otherwise; as we know by numerous profanations of all holy places in
Judea, triumphantly carried through, and avenged by no plausible
judgments. To speak only of the latter temple, three men are memorable
as having polluted its holiest recesses: Antiochus Epiphanes, Pompey
about a century later, and Titus pretty nearly by the same exact
interval later than Pompey. Upon which of these three did any judgment
descend? Attempts have been made to impress that coloring of the sequel
in two of these cases, indeed, but without effect upon _any_ man's
mind. Possibly in the case of Antiochus, who seems to have moved under
a burning hatred, not so much of the insurgent Jews as of the true
faith which prompted their resistance, there is some colorable argument
for viewing him in his miserable death as a monument of divine wrath.
But the two others had no such malignant spirit; they were tolerant,
and even merciful; were authorized instruments for executing the
purposes of Providence; and no calamity in the life of either can be
reasonably traced to his dealings with Palestine. Yet, if Christianity
could not brook for an instant the mere coëxistence of a Pagan oracle,
how came it that the Author of Christianity had thus brooked (nay, by
many signs of coöperation, had promoted) that ultimate desecration,
which planted "the abomination of desolation" as a victorious crest of
Paganism upon his own solitary altar? The institution of the Sabbath,
again--what part of the Mosaic economy could it more plausibly have
been expected that God should vindicate by some memorable interference,
since of all the Jewish institutions it was that one which only and
which frequently became the occasion of wholesale butchery to the pious
(however erring) Jews? The scruple of the Jews to fight, or even to
resist an assassin, on the Sabbath, was not the less pious in its
motive because erroneous in principle; yet no miracle interfered to
save them from the consequences of their infatuation. And this seemed
the more remarkable in the case of their war with Antiochus, because
_that_ (if any that history has recorded) was a holy war. But,
after one tragical experience, which cost the lives of a thousand
martyrs, the Maccabees--quite as much on a level with their scrupulous
brethren in piety as they were superior in good sense--began to reflect
that they had no shadow of a warrant from Scripture for counting upon
any miraculous aid; that the whole expectation, from first to last, had
been human and presumptuous; and that the obligation of fighting
valiantly against idolatrous compliances was, at all events, paramount
to the obligation of the Sabbath. In one hour, after unyoking
themselves from this monstrous millstone of their own forging, about
their own necks, the cause rose buoyantly aloft as upon wings of
victory; and, as their very earliest reward--as the first fruits from
thus disabusing their minds of windy presumptions--they found the very
case itself melting away which had furnished the scruple; since their
cowardly enemies, now finding that they would fight on all days alike,
had no longer any motive for attacking them on the Sabbath; besides
that their own astonishing victories henceforward secured to them often
the choice of the day not less than of the ground.

But, without lingering on these outworks of the true religion, namely,
1st, the Temple of Jerusalem; 2dly, the Sabbath,--both of which the
divine wisdom often saw fit to lay prostrate before the presumption of
idolatrous assaults, on principles utterly irreconcilable with the
Oracle doctrine of the fathers,--there is a still more flagrant
argument against the fathers, which it is perfectly confounding to find
both them and their confuter overlooking. It is this. Oracles, take
them at the very worst, were no otherwise hostile to Christianity than
as a branch of Paganism. If, for instance, the Delphic establishment
were hateful (as doubtless it was) to the holy spirit of truth which
burned in the mind of an apostle, _why_ was it hateful? Not
primarily in its character of Oracle, but in its universal character of
Pagan temple; not as an authentic distributor of counsels adapted to
the infinite situations of its clients--often very wise counsels; but
as being ultimately engrafted on the stem of idolatrous religion--as
deriving, in the last resort, their sanctions from Pagan deities, and,
therefore, as sharing _constructively_ in all the pollutions of
that tainted source. Now, therefore, if Christianity, according to the
fancy of the fathers, could not tolerate the co-presence of so much
evil as resided in the Oracle superstition,--that is, in the
derivative, in the secondary, in the not unfrequently neutralized or
even redundantly compensated mode of error,--then, _ŕ fortiori_,
Christianity could not have tolerated for an hour the parent
superstition, the larger evil, the fontal error, which diseased the
very organ of vision--which not merely distorted a few objects on the
road, but spread darkness over the road itself. Yet what is the fact?
So far from any mysterious repulsion _externally_ between
idolatrous errors and Christianity, as though the two schemes of belief
could no more coexist in the same society than two queen-bees in a
hive,--as though elementary nature herself recoiled from the abominable
_concursus_,--do but open a child's epitome of history, and you
find it to have required four entire centuries before the destroyer's
hammer and crowbar began to ring loudly against the temples of
idolatrous worship; and not before five, nay, locally six, or even
seven centuries had elapsed, could the better angel of mankind have
sung gratulations announcing that the great strife was over--that man
was inoculated with the truth; or have adopted the impressive language
of a Latin father, that "the owls were to be heard in _every_
village hooting from the dismantled fanes of heathenism, or the gaunt
wolf disturbing the sleep of peasants as he yelled in winter from the
cold, dilapidated altars." Even this victorious consummation was true
only for the southern world of civilization. The forests of Germany,
though pierced already to the south in the third and fourth centuries
by the torch of missionaries,--though already at that time illuminated
by the immortal Gothic version of the New Testament preceding Ulppilas,
and still surviving,--sheltered through ages in the north and east vast
tribes of idolaters, some awaiting the baptism of Charlemagne in the
eighth century and the ninth, others actually resuming a fierce
countenance of heathenism for the martial zeal of crusading knights in
the thirteenth and fourteenth. The history of Constantine has grossly
misled the world. It was very early in the fourth century (313 A. D.)
that Constantine found himself strong enough to take his _earliest_
steps for raising Christianity to a privileged station; which
station was not merely an effect and monument of its progress,
but a further cause of progress. In this latter light, as a power
advancing and moving, but politically still militant, Christianity
required exactly one other century to carry out and accomplish even its
eastern triumph. Dating from the era of the very inaugurating and
merely local acts of Constantine, we shall be sufficiently accurate in
saying that the corresponding period in the fifth century (namely, from
about 404 to 420 A. D.) first witnessed those uproars of ruin in Egypt
and Alexandria--fire racing along the old carious timbers, battering-
rams thundering against the ancient walls of the most horrid temples--
which rang so searchingly in the ears of Zosimus, extorting, at every
blow, a howl of Pagan sympathy from that ignorant calumniator of
Christianity. So far from the fact being, according to the general
prejudice, as though Constantine had found himself able to destroy
Paganism, and to replace it by Christianity; on the contrary, it was
both because he happened to be far too weak, in fact, for such a mighty
revolution, and because he _knew_ his own weakness, that he fixed
his new capital, as a preliminary caution, upon the Propontis.

There were other motives to this change, and particularly (as we have
attempted to show in a separate dissertation) motives of high political
economy, suggested by the relative conditions of land and agriculture
in Thrace and Asia Minor, by comparison with decaying Italy; but a
paramount motive, we are satisfied, and the earliest motive, was the
incurable Pagan bigotry of Rome. Paganism for Rome, it ought to have
been remembered by historians, was a mere necessity of her Pagan
origin. Paganism was the fatal dowry of Rome from her inauguration; not
only she had once received a retaining fee on behalf of Paganism, in
the mysterious _Ancile_, supposed to have fallen from heaven, but
she actually preserved this bribe amongst her rarest jewels. She
possessed a palladium, such a national amulet or talisman as many
Grecian or Asiatic cities had once possessed--a _fatal_ guarantee
to the prosperity of the state. Even the Sibylline books, whatever
ravages they might be supposed by the intelligent to have sustained in
a lapse of centuries, were popularly believed, in the latest period of
the Western empire, to exist as so many charters of supremacy. Jupiter
himself in Rome had put on a peculiar Roman physiognomy, which
associated him with the destinies of the gigantic state. Above all, the
solemn augury of the twelve vultures, so memorably passed downwards
from the days of Romulus, through generations as yet uncertain of the
event, and, therefore, chronologically incapable of participation in
any fraud--an augury _always_ explained as promising twelve
centuries of supremacy to Rome, from the year 748 or 750 B. C.--
coöperated with the endless other Pagan superstitions in anchoring the
whole Pantheon to the Capitol and Mount Palatine. So long as Rome had a
worldly hope surviving, it was impossible for her to forget the Vestal
Virgins, the College of Augurs, or the indispensable office and the
_indefeasible_ privileges of the _Pontifex Maximus_, which
(though Cardinal Baronius, in his great work, for many years sought to
fight off the evidences for that fact, yet afterwards partially he
confessed his error) actually availed--historically and _medallically_
can be demonstrated to have availed--for the temptation of Christian
Cćsars into collusive adulteries with heathenism. Here, for instance,
came an emperor that timidly recorded his scruples--feebly protested,
but gave way at once as to an ugly necessity. There came another, more
deeply religious, or constitutionally more bold, who fought long and
strenuously against the compromise. "What! should he, the delegate of
God, and the standard-bearer of the true religion, proclaim himself
officially head of the false? No; that was too much for his
conscience." But the fatal meshes of prescription, of superstitions
ancient and gloomy, gathered around him; he heard that he was no
perfect Cćsar without this office, and eventually the very same reason
which had obliged Augustus not to suppress, but himself to assume, the
tribunitian office, namely, that it was a popular mode of leaving
democratic organs untouched, whilst he neutralized their democratic
functions by absorbing them into his own, availed to overthrow all
Christian scruples of conscience, even in the most Christian of the
Cćsars, many years _after_ Constantine. The pious Theodosius found
himself literally compelled to become a Pagan pontiff. A _bon mot_
circulating amongst the people warned him that, if he
left the cycle of imperial powers incomplete, if he suffered the
galvanic battery to remain imperfect in its circuit of links, pretty
soon he would tempt treason to show its head, and would even for the
present find but an imperfect obedience. Reluctantly therefore the
emperor gave way: and perhaps soothed his fretting conscience, by
offering to heaven, as a penitential litany, that same petition which
Naaman the Syrian offered to the prophet Elijah as a reason for a
personal dispensation. Hardly more possible it was that a camel should
go through the eye of a needle, than that a Roman senator should
forswear those inveterate superstitions with which his own system of
aristocracy had been riveted for better and worse. As soon would the
Venetian senator, the gloomy "magnifico" of St. Mark, have consented to
Renounce the annual wedding of his republic with the Adriatic, as the
Roman noble, whether senator, or senator elect, or of senatorial
descent, would have dissevered his own solitary stem from the great
forest of his ancestral order; and this he must have done by doubting
the legend of Jupiter Stator, or by withdrawing his allegiance from
Jupiter Capitolinus. The Roman people universally became agitated
towards the opening of the fifth century after Christ, when their own
twelfth century was drawing near to its completion. Rome had now
reached the very condition of Dr. Faustus--having originally received a
known term of prosperity from some dark power; but at length hearing
the hours, one after the other, tolling solemnly from the church-tower,
as they exhausted the waning minutes of the very final day marked down
in the contract. The more profound was the faith of Rome in the flight
of the twelve vultures, once so glorious, now so sad, an augury, the
deeper was the depression as the last hour drew near that had been so
mysteriously prefigured. The reckoning, indeed, of chronology was
slightly uncertain. The Varronian account varied from others. But these
trivial differences might tell as easily against them as for them, and
did but strengthen the universal agitation. Alaric, in the opening of
the fifth century [about 4l0]--Attila, near the middle [445]--already
seemed prelusive earthquakes running before the final earthquake. And
Christianity, during this era of public alarm, was so far from assuming
a more winning aspect to Roman eyes, as a religion promising to survive
their own, that already, under that character of reversionary triumph,
this gracious religion seemed a public insult, and this meek religion a
perpetual defiance; pretty much as a king sees with scowling eyes, when
revealed to him in some glass of Cornelius Agrippa, the portraits of
that mysterious house which is destined to supplant his own.

Now, from this condition of feeling at Rome, it is apparent not only as
a fact that Constantine did not overthrow Paganism, but as a
possibility that he could not have overthrown it. In the fierce
conflict he would probably have been overthrown himself; and, even for
so much as he _did_ accomplish, it was well that he attempted it
at a distance from Rome. So profoundly, therefore, are the fathers in
error, that instead of that instant victory which they ascribe to
Christianity, even Constantine's revolution was merely local. Nearly
five centuries, in fact, it cost, and not three, to Christianize even
the entire Mediterranean empire of Rome; and the premature effort of
Constantine ought to be regarded as a mere _fluctus decumanus_ in
the continuous advance of the new religion,--one of those ambitious
billows which sometimes run far ahead of their fellows in a tide
steadily gaining ground, but which inevitably recede in the next
moment, marking only the strength of that tendency which sooner or
later is destined to fill the whole capacity of the shore.

To have proved, therefore, if it could have been proved, that
Christianity had been fatal in the way of a magical charm to the
Oracles of the world, would have proved nothing but a perplexing
inconsistency, so long as the fathers were obliged to confess that
Paganism itself, as a gross total, as the parent superstition (sure to
reproduce Oracles faster than they could be extinguished), had been
suffered to exist for many centuries concurrently with Christianity,
and had finally been overthrown by the simple majesty of truth that
courts the light, as matched against falsehood that shuns it.

As applied, therefore, to the first problem in the whole question upon
Oracles,--_When, and under what circumstances, did they cease?_--
the _Dissertatio_ of Van Dale, and the _Histoire des Oracles_
by Fontenelle, are irresistible, though not written in a proper spirit
of gravity, nor making use of that indispensable argument which we have
ourselves derived from the analogy of all scriptural precedents.

But the case is far otherwise as concerns the second problem,--_How,
and by what machinery, did the Oracles, in the days of their
prosperity, conduct their elaborate ministrations?_ To this problem
no justice at all is done by the school of Van Dale. A spirit of
mockery and banter is ill applied to questions that at any time have
been centres of fear, and hope, and mysterious awe, to long trains of
human generations. And the coarse assumption of systematic fraud in the
Oracles is neither satisfactory to the understanding, as failing to
meet many important aspects of the case, nor is it at all countenanced
by the kind of evidences that have been hitherto alleged. The fathers
had taken the course--vulgar and superstitious--of explaining
everything sagacious, everything true, everything that by possibility
could seem to argue prophetic functions in the greater Oracles, as the
product indeed of inspiration, but of inspiration emanating from an
evil spirit. This hypothesis of a diabolic inspiration is rejected by
the school of Van Dale. Both the power of at all looking into the
future, and the fancied source of that power, are dismissed as
contemptible chimeras. Upon the first of these dark pretensions we
shall have occasion to speak at another point. Upon the other we agree
with Van Dale. Yet, even here, the spirit of triumphant ridicule,
applied to questions not wholly within the competence of human
resources, is displeasing in grave discussions: grave they are by
necessity of their relations, howsoever momentarily disfigured by
levity and the unseasonable grimaces of self-sufficient "philosophy."
This temper of mind is already advertised from the first to the
observing reader of Van Dale by the character of his engraved
frontispiece. Men are there exhibited in the act of juggling, and still
more odiously as exulting over their juggleries by gestures of the
basest collusion, such as protruding the tongue, inflating one cheek by
means of the tongue, grinning, and winking obliquely. These vilenesses
are so ignoble, that for his own sake a man of honor (whether as a
writer or a reader) shrinks from dealing with any case to which they do
really adhere; such a case belongs to the province of police courts,
not of literature. But, in the ancient apparatus of the Oracles
although frauds and _espionage_ did certainly form an occasional
resource, the artifices employed were rarely illiberal in their mode,
and always ennobled by their motive. As to the mode, the Oracles had
fortunately no temptation to descend into any tricks that could look
like "thimble-rigging;" and as to the motive, it will be seen that this
could never be dissociated from some regard to public or patriotic
objects in the first place; to which if any secondary interest were
occasionally attached, this could rarely descend so low as even to an
ordinary purpose of gossiping curiosity, but never to a base, mercenary
purpose of fraud. Our views, however, on this phasis of the question,
will speedily speak for themselves.

Meantime, pausing for one moment to glance at the hypothesis of the
fathers, we confess ourselves to be scandalized by its unnecessary
plunge into the ignoble. Many sincere Christian believers have doubted
altogether of any evil spirits, as existences, warranted by Scripture,
that is, as beings whose principle was evil ["evil, be thou my good:"
P. L.]; others, again, believing in the possibility that spiritual
beings had been (in ways unintelligible to us) seduced from their state
of perfection by temptations analogous to those which had seduced man,
acquiesced in the notion of spirits tainted with evil, but not
therefore (any more than man himself) essentially or causelessly
malignant. Now, it is well known, and, amongst others, Eichhorn
_(Einletung in das alte Testament) has noticed the fact, which will
be obvious, on a little reflection, to any even unlearned student of
the Scriptures who can throw his memory back through a real familiarity
with those records, that the Jews derived their obstinate notions of
fiends and demoniacal possessions (as accounting even for bodily
affections) entirely from their Chaldean captivity. Not before that
great event in Jewish history, and, therefore, in consequence of that
event, were the Jews inoculated with this Babylonian, Persian, and
Median superstition. Now, if Eichhorn and others are right, it follows
that the elder Scriptures, as they ascend more and more into the purer
atmosphere of untainted Hebrew creeds, ought to exhibit an increasing
freedom from all these modes of demoniacal agency. And accordingly so
we find it. Messengers of God are often concerned in the early records
of Moses; but it is not until we come down to Post-Mosaical records,
Job, for example (though that book is doubtful as to its chronology),
and the chronicles of the Jewish kings (_Judaic or Israelitish)_,
that we first find any allusion to malignant spirits. As against
Eichhorn, however, though readily conceding that the agency is not
often recognized, we would beg leave to notice, that there is a three-
fold agency of evil, relatively to man, ascribed to certain spirits in
the elder Scriptures, namely: 1, of _misleading_ (as in the case
of the Israelitish king seduced into a fatal battle by a falsehood
originating with a spiritual being); 2, of _temptation_; 3, of
calumnious _accusation_ directed against absent parties. It is not
absolutely an untenable hypothesis, that these functions of malignity
to man, as at first sight they appear, may be in fact reconcilable with
the general functions of a being not malignant, and not evil in any
sense, but simply obedient to superior commands: for none of us
supposes, of course, that a "destroying angel" must be an evil spirit,
though sometimes appearing in a dreadful relation of hostility to
_all_ parties (as in the case of David's punishment). But, waiving
all these speculations, one thing is apparent, that the negative
allowance, the toleration granted to these later Jewish modes of belief
by our Saviour, can no more be urged as arguing any positive sanction
to such existences (to _demons_ in the bad sense), than his
toleration of Jewish errors and conceits in questions of science. Once
for all, it was no purpose of his mission to expose errors in matters
of pure curiosity, and in speculations _not_ moral, but exclusively
intellectual. And, besides the ordinary argument for rejecting
such topics of teaching, as not necessarily belonging to any known
purpose of the Christian revelation (which argument is merely
negative, and still leaves it open to have regarded such communications
as a possible _extra_ condescension, as a _lucro ponatur_,
not absolutely to have been expected, but if granted as all the more
meritorious in Christianity), we privately are aware of an argument,
far more rigorous and coërcive, which will place this question upon
quite another basis. This argument, which, in a proper situation, and
with ampler disposable space, we shall expose in its strength, will
show that it was not that neutral possibility which men have supposed,
for the founder of our faith to have granted light, casually or
indirectly, upon questions of curiosity. One sole revelation was made
by Him, as to the nature of the intercourse and the relations in
another world; but _that_ was for the purpose of forestalling a
vile, unspiritual notion, already current amongst the childish Jews,
and sure to propagate itself even to our own days, unless an utter
_averruncatio_ were applied to it. This was its purpose, and not
any purpose of gratification to unhallowed curiosity; we speak of the
question about the reversionary rights of marriage in a future state.
This memorable case, by the way, sufficiently exposes the gross,
infantine sensualism of the Jewish mind at that period, and throws an
indirect light on their creed as to demons. With this one exception,
standing by itself and self-explained, there never was a gleam of
revelation granted by any authorized prophet to speculative curiosity,
whether pointing to science, or to the mysteries of the spiritual
world. And the true argument on this subject would show that this
abstinence was not accidental; was not merely on a motive of
convenience, as evading any needless extension of labors in teaching,
which is the furthest point attained by any existing argument; but, on
the contrary, that there was an obligation of consistency, stern,
absolute, insurmountable, which made it _essential_ to withhold
such revelations; and that had but one such condescension, even to a
harmless curiosity, been conceded, there would have arisen instantly a
rent--a fracture--a schism--in another vast and collateral purpose of
Providence.

From all considerations of the Jewish condition at the era of
Christianity, the fathers might have seen the license for doubt as to
the notions of a diabolic inspiration. Why must the prompting spirits,
if really assumed to be the efficient agency behind the Oracles, be
figured as holding any relation at all to moral good or moral evil? Why
not allow of demoniac powers, excelling man in beauty, power,
prescience, but otherwise neutral as to all purposes of man's moral
nature? Or, if revolting angels were assumed, why degrade their agency
in so vulgar and unnecessary a way, by adopting the vilest relation to
man which can be imputed to a demon--his function of secret
_calumnious accusation_; from which idea, lowering the Miltonic
"archangel ruined" into the assessor of thieves, as a private slanderer
(_diabolos_), proceeds, through the intermediate Italian _diavolo_,
our own grotesque vulgarism of the _devil_; an idea
which must ever be injurious, in common with all base conceptions, to a
grand and spiritual religion. If the Oracles _were_ supported by
mysterious agencies of spiritual beings, it was still open to have
distinguished between mere modes of power or of intelligence, and modes
of illimitable evil. The _results_ of the Oracles were beneficent: that
was all which the fathers had any right to know: and their unwarranted
introduction of wicked or rebel angels was as much a surreptitious
fraud upon their audiences, as their neglect to distinguish between the
conditions of an extinct superstition and a superstition dormant or
decaying.

To leave the fathers, and to state our own views on the final question
argued by Van Dale--"What was the essential machinery by which the
Oracles moved?"--we shall inquire,

1. What was the relation of the Oracles (and we would wish to be
understood as speaking particularly of the Delphic Oracle) to the
credulity of Greece?

2. What was the relation of that same Oracle to the absolute truth?

3. What was its relation to the public welfare of Greece?

Into this trisection we shall decompose the coarse unity of the
question presented by Van Dale and his Vandals, as though the one sole
"issue," that could be sent down for trial before a jury, were the
likelihoods of fraud and gross swindling. It is not with the deceptions
or collusions of the Oracles, as mere matters of fact, that we in this
age are primarily concerned, but with those deceptions as they affected
the contemporary people of Greece. It is important to know whether the
general faith of Greece in the mysterious pretensions of Oracles were
unsettled or disturbed by the several agencies at work that naturally
tended to rouse suspicion; such, for instance, as these four which
follow:--1. Eminent instances of scepticism with regard to the oracular
powers, from time to time circulating through Greece in the shape of
_bon mots_; or, 2, which silently amounted to the same virtual
expression of distrust, Refusals (often more speciously wearing the
name of _neglects_) to consult the proper Oracle on some hazardous
enterprize of general notoriety and interest; 3. Cases of direct
failure in the event, as understood to have been predicted by the
Oracle, not unfrequently accompanied by tragical catastrophes to the
parties misled by this erroneous construction of the Oracle; 4. (which
is, perhaps, the climax of the exposures possible under the
superstitions of Paganism), A public detection of known oracular
temples doing business on a considerable scale, as accomplices with
felons.

Modern appraisers of the oracular establishments are too commonly in
all moral senses anachronists. We hear it alleged with some
plausibility against Southey's portrait of Don Roderick, though
otherwise conceived in a spirit proper for bringing out the whole
sentiment of his pathetic situation, that the king is too Protestant,
and too evangelical, after the model of 1800, in his modes of
penitential piety. The poet, in short, reflected back upon one who was
too certain in the eighth century to have been the victim of dark
popish superstitions, his own pure and enlightened faith. But the
anachronistic spirit in which modern sceptics react upon the Pagan
Oracles is not so elevating as the English poet's. Southey reflected
his own superiority upon the Gothic prince of Spain. But the sceptics
reflect their own vulgar habits of mechanic and compendious office
business upon the large institutions of the ancient Oracles. To satisfy
them, the Oracle should resemble a modern coach-office--where
undoubtedly you would suspect fraud, if the question "How far to
Derby?" were answered evasively, or if the grounds of choice between
two roads were expressed enigmatically. But the _to loxon_, or
mysterious indirectness of the Oracle, was calculated far more to
support the imaginative grandeur of the unseen God, and was designed to
do so, than to relieve the individual suitor in a perplexity seldom of
any capital importance. In this way every oracular answer operated upon
the local Grecian neighborhood in which it circulated as one of the
impulses which, from time to time, renewed the sense of a mysterious
involution in the invisible powers, as though they were incapable of
direct correspondence or parallelism with the monotony and slight
compass of human ideas. As the symbolic dancers of the ancients, who
narrated an elaborate story, _Saltando Hecubam_, or _Saltando
Loadamiam_, interwove the passion of the advancing incidents into
the intricacies of the figure--something in the same way, it was
understood by all men, that the Oracle did not so much evade the
difficulty by a dark form of words, as he revealed his own hieroglyphic
nature. All prophets, the true equally with the false, have felt the
instinct for surrounding themselves with the majesty of darkness. And
in a religion like the Pagan, so deplorably meagre and starved as to
most of the draperies connected with the mysterious and sublime, we
must not seek to diminish its already scanty wardrobe. But let us pass
from speculation to illustrative anecdotes. We have imagined several
cases which might seem fitted for giving a shock to the general Pagan
confidence in Oracles. Let us review them.

The first is the case of any memorable scepticism published in a
pointed or witty form; as Demosthenes avowed his suspicions "that the
Oracle was _Philippizing_." This was about 344 years B.C. Exactly
one hundred years earlier, in the 444th year B.C., or the _locus_
of Pericles, Herodotus (then forty years old) is universally supposed
to have read, which for _him_ was publishing, his history. In this
work two insinuations of the same kind occur: during the invasion of
Darius the Mede (about 490 B.C.) the Oracle was charged with
_Medizing_; and in the previous period of Pisistratus (about 555
B.C.) the Oracle had been almost convicted of _Alcmonidizing_.
The Oracle concerned was the same,--namely, the Delphic,--in all three
cases. In the case of Darius, fear was the ruling passion; in the
earlier case, a near self-interest, but not in a base sense selfish.
The Alemonidae, an Athenian house hostile to Pisistratus, being
exceedingly rich, had engaged to rebuild the ruined temple of the
Oracle; and had fulfilled their promise with a munificence outrunning
the letter of their professions, particularly with regard to the
quality of marble used in facing or "veneering" the front elevation.
Now, these sententious and rather witty expressions gave wings and
buoyancy to the public suspicions, so as to make them fly from one end
of Greece to the other; and they continued in lively remembrance for
centuries. Our answer we reserve until we have illustrated the other
heads.

In the second case, namely, that of sceptical slights shown to the
Oracle, there are some memorable precedents on record. Everybody knows
the ridiculous stratagem of Crsus, the Lydian king, for trying the
powers of the Oracle, by a monstrous culinary arrangement of pots and
pans, known (as he fancied) only to himself. Generally the course of
the Delphic Oracle under similar insults was--warmly to resent them.
But Crsus, as a king, a foreigner, and a suitor of unexampled
munificence, was privileged, especially because the ministers of the
Delphic temple had doubtless found it easy to extract the secret by
bribery from some one of the royal mission. A case, however, much more
interesting, because arising between two leading states of Greece, and
in the century subsequent to the ruder age of Crsus (who was about
coeval with Pisistratus, 555 B. C.), is reported by Xenophon of the
Lacedćmonians and Thebans. They concluded a treaty of peace without any
communication, not so much as a civil notification to the Oracle; _to
men Teo ouden ekoinosanto, hopis hć eirpnp genoito_--to the god (the
Delphic god) they made no communication at all as to the terms of the
peace; _outoi de ebeleuonto_, but they personally pursued their
negotiations in private. That this was a very extraordinary reach of
presumption, is evident from the care of Xenophon in bringing it before
his readers; it is probable, indeed, that neither of the high
contracting parties had really acted in a spirit of religious
indifference, though it is remarkable of the Spartans, that of all
Greek tribes they were the most facile and numerous delinquents under
all varieties of foreign temptations to revolt from their hereditary
allegiance--a fact which measures the degree of unnatural constraint
and tension which the Spartan usages involved; but in this case we
rather account for the public outrage to religion and universal usage,
by a strong political jealousy lest the provisions of the treaty should
transpire prematurely amongst states adjacent to Botia.

Whatever, meantime, were the secret motive to this policy, it did not
fail to shock all Greece profoundly. And, in a slighter degree, the
same effect upon public feeling followed the act of Agesipolis, who,
after obtaining an answer from the Oracle of Delphi, carried forward
his suit to the more awfully ancient Oracle of Dodona; by way of
trying, as he alleged, "whether the child agreed with its papa." These
open expressions of distrust were generally condemned; and the
irresistible proof that they were, lies in the fact that they led to no
imitations. Even in a case mentioned by Herodotus, when a man had the
audacity to found a colony without seeking an oracular sanction, no
precedent was established; though the journey to Delphi must often have
been peculiarly inconvenient to the founders of colonies moving
westwards from Greece; and the expenses of such a journey, with the
subsequent offerings, could not but prove unseasonable at the moment
when every drachma was most urgently needed. Charity begins at home,
was a thought quite as likely to press upon a Pagan conscience, in
those circumstances, as upon our modern Christian consciences under
heavy taxation; yet, for all that, such was the regard to a pious
inauguration of all colonial enterprises, that no one provision or
pledge of prosperity was held equally indispensable by all parties to
such hazardous speculations. The merest worldly foresight, indeed, to
the most irreligious leader, would suggest this sanction as a
necessity, under the following reason:--colonies the most enviably
prosperous upon the whole, have yet had many hardships to contend with
in their noviciate of the first five years; were it only from the
summer failure of water under circumstances of local ignorance, or from
the casual failure of crops under imperfect arrangements of culture.
Now, the one great qualification for wrestling strenuously with such
difficult contingencies in solitary situations, is the spirit of
cheerful hope; but, when any room had been left for apprehending a
supernatural curse resting upon their efforts--equally in the most
thoughtfully pious man and the most crazily superstitious--all spirit
of hope would be blighted at once; and the religious neglect would,
even in a common human way, become its own certain executor, through
mere depression of spirits and misgiving of expectations. Well,
therefore, might Cicero in a tone of defiance demand, "Quam vero Grćcia
coloniam misit in Ćtoliam, Ioniam, Asiam, Siciliam, Italiam, sine
Pythio (the Delphic), aut Dodonseo, aut Hammonis oraculo?" An oracular
sanction must be had, and from a leading oracle--the three mentioned by
Cicero were the greatest; and, if a minor oracle could have
satisfied the inaugurating necessities of a regular colony, we may be
sure that the Dorian states of the Peloponnesus, who had twenty-five
decent oracles at home (that is, within the peninsula), would not so
constantly have carried their money to Delphi. Nay, it is certain that
even where the colonial counsels of the greater oracles seemed
extravagant, though a large discretion was allowed to remonstrance, and
even to very homely expostulations, still, in the last resort, no
doubts were felt that the oracle must be right. Brouwer, the Belgic
scholar, who has so recently and so temperately treated these subjects
(Histoire de la Civilisation Morale et Religieuse chez les Grecs: 6
tomes: Groningue--1840), alleges a case (which, however, we do not
remember to have met) where the client ventured to object:--"_Mon roi
Apollon, je crois que tu es fou._" But cases are obvious which look
this way, though not going so far as to charge lunacy upon the lord of
prophetic vision. Battus, who was destined to be the eldest father of
Cyrene, so memorable as the first ground of Greek intercourse with the
African shore of the Mediterranean, never consulted the Delphic Oracle
in reference to his eyes, which happened to be diseased, but that he
was admonished to prepare for colonizing Libya.--"Grant me patience,"
would Battus reply; "here am I getting into years, and never do I
consult the Oracle about my precious sight, but you, King Phbus, begin
your old yarn about Cyrene. Confound Cyrene! Nobody knows where it is.
But, if you are serious, speak to my son--he's a likely young man, and
worth a hundred of old rotten hulks, like myself." Battus was provoked
in good earnest; and it is well known that the whole scheme went to
sleep for several years, until King Phoebus sent in a gentle refresher
to Battus and his islanders, in the shape of failing crops, pestilence,
and his ordinary chastisements. The people were roused--the colony was
founded--and, after utter failure, was again re-founded, and the
results justified the Oracle. But, in all such cases, and where the
remonstrances were least respectful, or where the resistance of
_inertia_ was longest, we differ altogether from M. Brouwer in his
belief, that the suitors fancied Apollo to have gone distracted. If
they ever said so, this must have been merely by way of putting the
Oracle on its mettle, and calling forth some _plainer_--not any
essentially different--answer from the enigmatic god; for there it was
that the doubts of the clients settled, and on that it was the
practical demurs hinged. Not because even Battus, vexed as he was about
his precious eyesight, distrusted the Oracle, but because he felt sure
that the Oracle had not spoken out freely; therefore, had he and many
others in similar circumstances presumed to delay. A second edition was
what they waited for, corrected and _enlarged_. We have a memorable
instance of this policy in the Athenian envoys, who, upon receiving a
most ominous doom, but obscurely expressed, from the Delphic Oracle,
which politely concluded by saying, "And so get out, you vagabonds,
from my temple--don't cumber my decks any longer;" were advised to
answer sturdily--"No!--we shall _not_ get out--we mean to sit here
forever, until you think proper to give us a more reasonable reply."
Upon which spirited rejoinder, the Pythia saw the policy of revising
her truly brutal rescript as it had stood originally.

The necessity, indeed, was strong for not acquiescing in the Oracle,
until it had become clearer by revision or by casual illustrations, as
will be seen even under our next head. This head concerns the case of
those who found themselves deceived by the _event_ of any oracular
prediction. As usual, there is a Spartan case of this nature. Cleomenes
complained bitterly that the Oracle of Delphi had deluded him by
holding out as a possibility, and under given conditions as a
certainty, that he should possess himself of Argos. But the Oracle was
justified: there was an inconsiderable place outside the walls of Argos
which bore the same name. Most readers will remember the case of
Cambyses, who had been assured by a legion of oracles that he should
die at Ecbatana. Suffering, therefore, in Syria from a scratch
inflicted upon his thigh by his own sabre, whilst angrily sabring a
ridiculous quadruped whom the Egyptian priests had put forward as a
god, he felt quite at his ease so long as he remembered his vast
distance from the mighty capital of Media, to the eastward of the
Tigris. The scratch, however, inflamed, for his intemperance had
saturated his system with combustible matter; the inflammation spread;
the pulse ran high: and he began to feel twinges of alarm. At length
mortification commenced: but still he trusted to the old prophecy about
Ecbatana, when suddenly a horrid discovery was made--that the very
Syrian village at his own head-quarters was known by the pompous name
of Ecbatana. Josephus tells a similar story of some man contemporary
with Herod the Great. And we must all remember that case in Shakspeare,
where the first king of the _red_ rose, Henry IV., had long
fancied his destiny to be that he should meet his death in Jerusalem;
which naturally did not quicken his zeal for becoming a crusader. "All
time enough," doubtless he used to say; "no hurry at all, gentlemen!"
But at length, finding himself pronounced by the doctor ripe for dying,
it became a question whether the prophet were a false prophet, or the
doctor a false doctor. However, in such a case, it is something to have
a collision of opinions--a prophet against a doctor. But, behold, it
soon transpired that there was no collision at all. It was the
Jerusalem chamber, occupied by the king as a bed-room, to which the
prophet had alluded. Upon which his majesty reconciled himself at once
to the ugly necessity at hand


  "In that Jerusalem shall Harry die."


The last case--that of oracular establishments turning out to be
accomplices of thieves--is one which occurred in Egypt on a scale of
some extent; and is noticed by Herodotus. This degradation argued great
poverty in the particular temples: and it is not at all improbable
that, amongst a hundred Grecian Oracles, some, under a similar
temptation, would fall into a similar disgrace. But now, as regards
even this lowest extremity of infamy, much more as regards the
qualified sort of disrepute attending the three minor cases, one single
distinction puts all to rights. The Greeks never confounded the temple,
and household of officers attached to the temple service, with the dark
functions of the presiding god. In Delphi, besides the Pythia and
priests, with their train of subordinate ministers directly billeted on
the temple, there were two orders of men outside, Delphic citizens, one
styled _Arizeis_, the other styled _Hosioi_,--a sort of honorary
members, whose duty was probably _inter alia_, to attach themselves
to persons of corresponding rank in the retinues of the envoys
or consulting clients, and doubtless to collect from them, in
convivial moments, all the secrets or general information which the
temple required for satisfactory answers. If they personally went too
far in their intrigues or stratagems of decoy, the disgrace no more
recoiled on the god, than, in modern times, the vices or crimes of a
priest can affect the pure religion at whose altars he officiates.

Meantime, through these outside ministers--though unaffected by their
follies or errors as trepanners--the Oracle of Delphi drew that vast
and comprehensive information, from every local nook or recess of
Greece, which made it in the end a blessing to the land. The great
error is, to suppose the majority of cases laid before the Delphic
Oracle strictly questions for _prophetic_ functions. Ninety-nine
in a hundred respected marriages, state-treaties, sales, purchases,
founding of towns or colonies, &c., which demanded no faculty whatever
of divination, but the nobler faculty (though unpresumptuous) of
sagacity, that calculates the natural consequences of human acts,
cooperating with elaborate investigation of the local circumstances.
If, in any paper on the general civilization of Greece (that great
mother of civilization for all the world), we should ever attempt to
trace this element of Oracles, it will not be difficult to prove that
Delphi discharged the office of a central _bureau d'administration_,
a general depot of political information, an organ of universal
combination for the counsels of the whole Grecian race. And that which
caused the declension of the Oracles was the loss of political
independence and autonomy. After Alexander, still more after the Roman
conquest, each separate state, having no powers and no motive for
asking counsel on state measures, naturally confined itself more and
more to its humbler local interests of police, or even at last to its
family arrangements.

It is falsely charged upon itself by this age, in its character of
_censor morum_, that effeminacy in a practical sense lies either
amongst its full-blown faults, or amongst its lurking tendencies. A
rich, a polished, a refined age, may, by mere necessity of inference,
be presumed to be a luxurious one; and the usual principle, by which
moves the whole trivial philosophy which speculates upon the character
of a particular age or a particular nation, is first of all to adopt
some one central idea of its characteristics, and then without further
effort to pursue its integration; that is, having assumed (or, suppose
even having demonstrated) the existence of some great influential
quality in excess sufficient to overthrow the apparent equilibrium
demanded by the common standards of a just national character, the
speculator then proceeds, as in a matter of acknowledged right, to push
this predominant quality into all its consequences, and all its closest
affinities. To give one illustration of such a case, now perhaps
beginning to be forgotten: Somewhere about the year 1755, the once
celebrated Dr. Brown, after other little attempts in literature and
paradox, took up the conceit that England was ruined at her heart's
core by excess of luxury and sensual self-indulgence. He had persuaded
himself that the ancient activities and energies of the country were
sapped by long habits of indolence, and by a morbid plethora of
enjoyment in every class. Courage, and the old fiery spirit of the
people, had gone to wreck with the physical qualities which had
sustained them. Even the faults of the public mind had given way under
its new complexion of character; ambition and civil dissension were
extinct. It was questionable whether a good hearty assault and battery,
or a respectable knock-down blow, had been dealt by any man in London
for one or two generations. The doctor carried his reveries so far,
that he even satisfied himself and one or two friends (probably by
looking into the parks at hours propitious to his hypothesis) that
horses were seldom or ever used for riding; that, in fact, this
accomplishment was too boisterous or too perilous for the gentle
propensities of modern Britons; and that, by the best accounts, few men
of rank or fashion were now seen on horseback. This pleasant collection
of dreams did Doctor Brown solemnly propound to the English public, in
two octavo volumes, under the title of "An Estimate of the Manners and
Principles of the Times;" and the report of many who lived in those
days assures us that for a brief period the book had a prodigious run.
In some respects the doctor's conceits might seem too startling and
extravagant; but, to balance _that_, every nation has some pleasure
in being heartily abused by one of its own number; and the English
nation has always had a special delight in being alarmed, and in
being clearly convinced that it is and ought to be on the brink of
ruin. With such advantages in the worthy doctor's favor, he might have
kept the field until some newer extravaganza had made his own obsolete,
had not one ugly turn in political affairs given so smashing a
refutation to his practical conclusions, and called forth so sudden a
rebound of public feeling in the very opposite direction, that a bomb-
shell descending right through the whole impression of his book could
not more summarily have laid a chancery "injunction" upon its further
sale. This arose under the brilliant administration of the first Mr.
Pitt: England was suddenly victorious in three quarters of the globe;
land and sea echoed to the voice of her triumphs; and the poor Doctor
Brown, in the midst of all this hubbub, cut his own throat with his own
razor. Whether this dismal catastrophe were exactly due to his
mortification as a baffled visionary, whose favorite conceit had
suddenly exploded like a rocket into smoke and stench, is more than we
know. But, at all events, the sole memorial of his hypothesis which now
reminds the English reader that it ever existed is one solitary notice
of good-humored satire pointed at it by Cowper. And the possibility of such exceeding
folly in a man otherwise of good sense and judgment, not depraved by
any brain-fever or enthusiastic infatuation, is to be found in the
vicious process of reasoning applied to such estimates; the doctor,
having taken up one novel idea of the national character, proceeded
afterwards by no tentative inquiries, or comparison with actual facts
and phenomena of daily experience, but resolutely developed out of his
one idea all that it appeared analytically to involve; and postulated
audaciously as a solemn fact whatsoever could be exhibited in any
possible connection with his one central principle, whether in the way
of consequence or of affinity.

Pretty much upon this unhappy Brunonian mode of deducing our national
character, it is a very plausible speculation, which has been and will
again be chanted, that we, being a luxurious nation, must by force of
good logical dependency be liable to many derivative taints and
infirmities which ought of necessity to besiege the blood of nations in
that predicament. All enterprise and spirit of adventure, all heroism
and courting of danger for its own attractions, ought naturally to
languish in a generation enervated by early habits of personal
indulgence. Doubtless they _ought; a priori_, it seems strictly
demonstrable that such consequences should follow. Upon the purest
forms of inference in _Barbara_ or _Celarent_, it can be shown
satisfactorily that from all our tainted classes, _a fortiori_
then from our most tainted classes--our men of fashion and of
opulent fortunes--no description of animal can possibly arise but
poltroons and _fainéans_. In fact, pretty generally, under the
known circumstances of our modern English education and of our social
habits, we ought, in obedience to all the _precognita_ of our
position, to show ourselves rank cowards; yet, in spite of so much
excellent logic, the facts are otherwise. No age has shown in its young
patricians a more heroic disdain of sedentary ease; none in a martial
support of liberty or national independence has so gayly volunteered
upon services the most desperate, or shrunk less from martyrdom on the
field of battle, whenever there was hope to invite their disinterested
exertions, or grandeur enough in the cause to sustain them. Which of us
forgets the gallant Mellish, the frank and the generous, who reconciled
himself so gayly to the loss of a splendid fortune, and from the very
bosom of luxury suddenly precipitated himself upon the hardships of
Peninsular warfare? Which of us forgets the adventurous Lee of Lime,
whom a princely estate could not detain in early youth from courting
perils in Nubia and Abyssinia, nor (immediately upon his return) from
almost wooing death as a volunteer aide-de-camp to the Duke of
Wellington at Waterloo? So again of Colonel Evans, who, after losing a
fine estate long held out to his hopes, five times over put himself at
the head of _forlorn hopes_. Such cases are memorable, and were
conspicuous at the time, from the lustre of wealth and high connections
which surrounded the parties; but many thousand others, in which the
sacrifices of personal ease were less noticeable from their narrower
scale of splendor, had equal merit for the cheerfulness with which
those sacrifices were made. Here, again, in the person of the author before us,
we have another instance of noble and disinterested heroism, which,
from the magnitude of the sacrifices that it involved, must place him
in the same class as the Mellishes and the Lees. This gallant Scotsman,
who was born in 1788, or 1789, lost his father in early life.
Inheriting from him a good estate in Aberdeenshire, and one more
considerable in Jamaica, he found himself, at the close of a long
minority, in the possession of a commanding fortune. Under the vigilant
care of a sagacious mother, Mr. Gordon received the very amplest
advantages of a finished education, studying first at the University of
Aberdeen, and afterwards for two years at Oxford; whilst he had
previously enjoyed as a boy the benefits of a private tutor from
Oxford. Whatever might be the immediate result from this careful
tuition, Mr. Gordon has since completed his own education in the most
comprehensive manner, and has carried his accomplishments as a linguist
to a point of rare excellence. Sweden and Portugal excepted, we
understand that he has personally visited every country in Europe. He
has travelled also in Asiatic Turkey, in Persia, and in Barbary. From
this personal residence in foreign countries, we understand that Mr.
Gordon has obtained an absolute mastery over certain modern languages,
especially the French, the Italian, the modern Greek, and the
Turkish. Not content, however, with this extensive education in a
literary sense, Mr. Gordon thought proper to prepare himself for the
part which he meditated in public life, by a second, or military
education, in two separate services;--first, in the British, where he
served in the Greys, and in the forty-third regiment; and subsequently,
during the campaign of 1813, as a captain on the Russian staff.

Thus brilliantly accomplished for conferring lustre and benefit upon
any cause which he might adopt amongst the many revolutionary movements
then continually emerging in Southern Europe, he finally carried the
whole weight of his great talents, prudence, and energy, together with
the unlimited command of his purse, to the service of Greece in her
heroic struggle with the Sultan. At what point his services and his
countenance were appreciated by the ruling persons in Greece, will be
best collected from the accompanying letter, translated from the
original, in modern Greek, addressed to him by the provisional
government of Greece, in 1822. It will be seen that this official
document notices with great sorrow Mr. Gordon's absence from Greece,
and with some surprise, as a fact at that time unexplained and
mysterious; but the simple explanation of this mystery was, that Mr.
Gordon had been brought to the very brink of the grave by a contagious
fever, at Tripolizza, and that his native air was found essential to
his restoration. Subsequently, however, he returned, and rendered the
most powerful services to Greece, until the war was brought to a close,
as much almost by Turkish exhaustion, as by the armed interference of
the three great conquerors of Navarino.

"The government of Greece to the SIGNOR GORDON, a man worthy of all
admiration, and a friend of the Grecians, health and prosperity.

"It was not possible, most excellent sir, nor was it a thing endurable
to the descendants of the Grecians, that they should be deprived any
longer of those imprescriptible rights which belong to the inheritance
of their birth--rights which a barbarian of a foreign soil, an anti-
christian tyrant, issuing from the depths of Asia, seized upon with a
robber's hand, and, lawlessly trampling under foot, administered up to
this time the affairs of Greece, after his own lust and will. Needs it
was that we, sooner or later, shattering this iron and heavy sceptre,
should recover, at the price of life itself (if _that_ were found
necessary), our patrimonial heritage, that thus our people might again
be gathered to the family of free and self-legislating states. Moving,
then, under such impulses, the people of Greece advanced with one
heart, and perfect unanimity of council, against an oppressive
despotism, putting their hands to an enterprise beset with
difficulties, and hard indeed to be achieved, yet, in our present
circumstances, if any one thing in this life, most indispensable. This,
then, is the second year which we are passing since we have begun to
move in this glorious contest, once again struggling, to all
appearance, upon unequal terms, but grasping our enterprise with the
right hand and the left, and with all our might stretching forward to
the objects before us.

"It was the hope of Greece that, in these seasons of emergency, she
would not fail of help and earnest resort of friends from the Christian
nations throughout Europe. For it was agreeable neither to humanity nor
to piety, that the rights of nations, liable to no grudges of malice or
scruples of jealousy, should be surreptitiously and wickedly filched
away, or mocked with outrage and insult; but that they should be
settled firmly on those foundations which Nature herself has furnished
in abundance to the condition of man in society. However, so it was,
that Greece, cherishing these most reasonable expectations, met with
most unmerited disappointments.

"But you, noble and generous Englishman, no sooner heard the trumpet of
popular rights echoing melodiously from the summits of Taygetus, of
Ida, of Pindus, and of Olympus, than, turning with listening ears to
the sound, and immediately renouncing the delights of country, of
family ties, and (what is above all) of domestic luxury and ease, and
the happiness of your own fireside, you hurried to our assistance. But
suddenly, and in contradiction to the universal hope of Greece, by
leaving us, you have thrown us all into great perplexity and amazement,
and that at a crisis when some were applying their minds to military
pursuits, some to the establishment of a civil administration, others
to other objects, but all alike were hurrying and exerting themselves
wherever circumstances seemed to invite them.

"Meantime, the government of Greece having heard many idle rumors and
unauthorized tales disseminated, but such as seemed neither in
correspondence with their opinion of your own native nobility from rank
and family, nor with what was due to the newly-instituted
administration, have slighted and turned a deaf ear to them all, coming
to this resolution--that, in absenting yourself from Greece, you are
doubtless obeying some strong necessity; for that it is not possible
nor credible of a man such as you displayed yourself to be whilst
living amongst us, that he should mean to insult the wretched--least of
all, to insult the unhappy and much-suffering people of Greece. Under
these circumstances, both the deliberative and the executive bodies of
the Grecian government, assembling separately, have come to a
resolution, without one dissentient voice, to invite you back to
Greece, in order that you may again take a share in the Grecian
contest--a contest in itself glorious, and not alien from your
character and pursuits. For the liberty of any one nation cannot be a
matter altogether indifferent to the rest, but naturally it is a common
and diffusive interest; and nothing can be more reasonable than that
the Englishman and the Grecian, in such a cause, should make themselves
yoke-fellows, and should participate as brothers in so holy a struggle.
Therefore, the Grecian government hastens, by this present
distinguished expression of its regard, to invite you to the soil of
Greece, a soil united by such tender memorials with yourself; confident
that you, preferring glorious poverty and the hard living of Greece to
the luxury and indolence of an obscure seclusion, will hasten your
return to Greece, agreeably to your native character, restoring to us
our valued English connection. Farewell!

Since then, having in 1817 connected himself in marriage with a
beautiful young lady of Armenian Greek extraction, and having purchased
land and built a house in Argos, Mr. Gordon may be considered in some
sense as a Grecian citizen. Services in the field having now for some
years been no longer called for, he has exchanged his patriotic sword
for a patriotic pen--judging rightly that in no way so effectually can
Greece be served at this time with Western Europe, as by recording
faithfully the course of her revolution, tracing the difficulties which
lay or which arose in her path, the heroism with which she surmounted
them, and the multiplied errors by which she raised up others to
herself. Mr. Gordon, of forty authors who have partially treated this
theme, is the first who can be considered either impartial or
comprehensive; and upon his authority, not seldom using his words, we
shall now present to our readers the first continuous abstract of this
most interesting and romantic war:

GREECE, in the largest extent of that term, having once belonged to the
Byzantine empire, is included, by the misconception of hasty readers,
in the great wreck of 1453. They take it for granted that, concurrently
with Constantinople, and the districts adjacent, these provinces passed
at that disastrous era into the hands of the Turkish conqueror; but
this is an error. Parts of Greece, previously to that era, had been
dismembered from the Eastern empire;--other parts did not, until long
_after_ it, share a common fate with the metropolis. Venice had a
deep interest in the Morea; _in_ that, and _for_ that, she fought with
various success for generations; and it was not until the year 1717,
nearly three centuries from the establishment of the crescent in
Europe, that "the banner of St. Mark, driven finally from the Morea and
the Archipelago," was henceforth exiled (as respected Greece) to the
Ionian Islands.

In these contests, though Greece was the prize at issue, the children
of Greece had no natural interest, whether the cross prevailed or the
crescent; the same, for all substantial results, was the fate which
awaited themselves. The Moslem might be the more intolerant by his
maxims, and he might be harsher in his professions; but a slave is not
the less a slave, though his master should happen to hold the same
creed with himself; and towards a member of the Greek church one who
looked westward to Rome for his religion was likely to be little less
of a bigot than one who looked to Mecca. So that we are not surprised
to find a Venetian rule of policy recommending, for the daily allowance
of these Grecian slaves, "a _little_ bread, and a liberal application
of the cudgel"! Whichever yoke were established was sure to be hated;
and, therefore, it was fortunate for the honor of the Christian name,
that from the year 1717 the fears and the enmity of the Greeks were to
be henceforward pointed exclusively towards _Mahometan_ tyrants.

To be hated, however, sufficiently for resistance, a yoke must have
been long and continuously felt. Fifty years might be necessary to
season the Greeks with a knowledge of Turkish oppression; and less than
two generations could hardly be supposed to have manured the whole
territory with an adequate sense of the wrongs they were enduring, and
the withering effects of such wrongs on the sources of public
prosperity. Hatred, besides, without hope, is no root out of which an
effective resistance can be expected to grow; and fifty years almost
had elapsed before a great power had arisen in Europe, having in any
capital circumstance a joint interest with Greece, or specially
authorized, by visible right and power, to interfere as her protector.
The semi-Asiatic power of Russia, from the era of the Czar Peter the
Great, had arisen above the horizon with the sudden sweep and splendor
of a meteor. The arch described by her ascent was as vast in compass as
it was rapid; and, in all history, no political growth, not that of our
own Indian empire, had travelled by accelerations of speed so
terrifically marked. Not that even Russia could have really grown in
strength according to the _apparent_ scale of her progress. The
strength was doubtless there, or much of it, before Peter and
Catherine; but it was latent: there had been no such sudden growth as
people fancied; but there had been a sudden evolution. Infinite
resources had been silently accumulating from century to century; but,
before the Czar Peter, no mind had come across them of power sufficient
to reveal their situation, or to organize them for practical effects.
In some nations, the manifestations of power are coincident with its
growth; in others, from vicious institutions, a vast crystallization
goes on for ages blindly and in silence, which the lamp of some
meteoric mind is required to light up into brilliant display. Thus it
had been in Russia; and hence, to the abused judgment of all
Christendom, she had seemed to leap like Pallas from the brain of
Jupiter--gorgeously endowed, and in panoply of civil array, for all
purposes of national grandeur, at the _fiat_ of one coarse
barbarian. As the metropolitan home of the Greek church, she could not
disown a maternal interest in the humblest of the Grecian tribes,
holding the same faith with herself, and celebrating their worship by
the same rites. This interest she could, at length, venture to express
in a tone of sufficient emphasis; and Greece became aware that she
could, about the very time when Turkish oppression had begun to unite
its victims in aspirations for redemption, and had turned their eyes
abroad in search of some great standard under whose shadow they could
flock for momentary protection, or for future hope. What cabals were
reared upon this condition of things by Russia, and what premature
dreams of independence were encouraged throughout Greece in the reign
of Catherine II., may be seen amply developed, in the once celebrated
work of Mr. William Eton.

Another great circumstance of hope for Greece, coinciding with the dawn
of her own earliest impetus in this direction, and travelling _puri
passu_ almost with the growth of her mightiest friend, was the
advancing decay of her oppressor. The wane of the Turkish crescent had
seemed to be in some secret connection of fatal sympathy with the
growth of the Russian cross. Perhaps the reader will thank us for
rehearsing the main steps by which the Ottoman power had flowed and
ebbed. The foundations of this empire were laid in the thirteenth
century, by Ortogrul, the chief of a Turkoman tribe, residing in tents
not far from Dorylćum, in Phrygia (a name so memorable in the early
crusades), about the time when Jenghiz had overthrown the Seljukian
dynasty. His son Osman first assumed the title of Sultan; and, in 1300,
having reduced the city of Prusa, in Bithynia, he made it the capital
of his dominions. The Sultans who succeeded him for some generations,
all men of vigor, and availing themselves not less of the decrepitude
which had by that time begun to palsy the Byzantine sceptre, than of
the martial and religious fanaticism which distinguished their own
followers, crossed the Hellespont, conquering Thrace and the countries
up to the Danube. In 1453, the most eminent of these Sultans, Mahomet
II., by storming Constantinople, put an end to the Roman empire; and
before his death he placed the Ottoman power in Europe pretty nearly on
that basis to which it had again fallen back by 1821. The long interval
of time between these two dates involved a memorable flux and reflux of
power, and an oscillation between two extremes of panic-striking
grandeur, in the ascending scale (insomuch that the Turkish Sultan was
supposed to be charged in the Apocalypse with the dissolution of the
Christian thrones), and in the descending scale of paralytic dotage
tempting its own instant ruin. In speculating on the causes of the
extraordinary terror which the Turks once inspired, it is amusing, and
illustrative of the revolutions worked by time, to find it imputed, in
the first place, to superior discipline; for, if their discipline was
imperfect, they had, however, a _standing_ army of Janissaries,
whilst the whole of Christian Europe was accustomed to fight merely
summer campaigns with hasty and untrained levies; a second cause lay in
their superior finances, for the Porte had a regular revenue, when the
other powers of Europe relied upon the bounty of their vassals and
clergy; and, thirdly, which is the most surprising feature of the whole
statement, the Turks were so far ahead of others in the race of
improvement, that to them belongs the credit of having first adopted
the extensive use of gunpowder, and of having first brought battering-
trains against fortified places. To his artillery and his musketry it
was that Selim the Ferocious (grandson of that Sultan who took
Constantinople) was indebted for his victories in Syria and Egypt.
Under Solyman the Magnificent (the well-known contemporary of the
Emperor Charles Y.) the crescent is supposed to have attained its
utmost altitude; and already for fifty years the causes had been in
silent progress which were to throw the preponderance into the
Christian scale. In the reign of his son, Selim the Second, this crisis
was already passed; and the battle of Lepanto, in 1571, which crippled
the Turkish navy in a degree never wholly recovered, gave the first
overt signal to Europe of a turn in the course of their prosperity.
Still, as this blow did not equally affect the principal arm of their
military service, and as the strength of the German empire was too much
distracted by Christian rivalship, the _prestige_ of the Turkish
name continued almost unbroken until their bloody overthrow in 1664, at
St. Gothard, by the imperial General Montecuculi. In 1673 they received
another memorable defeat from Sobieski, on which occasion they lost
twenty-five thousand men. In what degree, however, the Turkish Samson
had been shorn of his original strength, was not yet made known to
Europe by any adequate expression, before the great catastrophe of
1683. In that year, at the instigation of the haughty vizier, Kara
Mustafa, the Turks had undertaken the siege of Vienna; and great was
the alarm of the Christian world. But, on the 12th of September, their
army of one hundred and fifty thousand men was totally dispersed by
seventy thousand Poles and Germans, under John Sobieski--"He conquering
_through_ God, and God by him." Then
followed the treaty of Carlovitz, which stripped the Porte of Hungary,
the Ukraine, and other places; and "henceforth" says Mr. Gordon,
"Europe ceased to dread the Turks; and began even to look upon their
existence as a necessary element of the balance of power among its
states." Spite of their losses, however, during the first half of the
eighteenth century, the Turks still maintained a respectable attitude
against Christendom. But the wars of the Empress Catherine II., and the
French invasion of Egypt, demonstrated that either their native vigor
was exhausted and superannuated, or, at least, that the institutions
were superannuated by which their resources had been so long
administered. Accordingly, at the commencement of the present century,
the Sultan Selim II. endeavored to reform the military discipline; but
in the first collision with the prejudices of his people, and the
interest of the Janissaries, he perished by sedition. Mustafa, who
succeeded to the throne, in a few months met the same fate. But then
(1808) succeeded a prince formed by nature for such struggles,--cool,
vigorous, cruel, and intrepid. This was Mahmoud the Second. He
perfectly understood the crisis, and determined to pursue the plans of
his uncle Selim, even at the hazard of the same fate. Why was it that
Turkish soldiers had been made ridiculous in arms, as often as they had
met with French troops, who yet were so far from being the best in
Christendom, that Egypt herself, and the beaten Turks, had seen
_them_ in turn uniformly routed by the British? Physically, the
Turks were equal, at the very least, to the French. In what lay their
inferiority? Simply in discipline, and in their artillery. And so long
as their constitution and discipline continued what they had been,
suited (that is) to centuries long past and gone, and to a condition of
Christendom obsolete for ages, so long it seemed inevitable that the
same disasters should follow the Turkish banners. And to this point,
accordingly, the Sultan determined to address his earliest reforms. But
caution was necessary; he waited and watched. He seized all
opportunities of profiting by the calamities or the embarrassments of
his potent neighbors. He put down all open revolt. He sapped the
authority of all the great families in Asia Minor, whose hereditary
influence could be a counterpoise to his own. Mecca and Medina, the
holy cities of his religion, he brought again within the pale of his
dominions. He augmented and fostered, as a counterbalancing force to
the Janissaries, the corps of the Topjees or artillery-men. He amassed
preparatory treasures. And, up to the year 1820, "his government," says
Mr. Gordon, "was highly unpopular; but it was strong, stern, and
uniform; and he had certainly removed many impediments to the execution
of his ulterior projects."

Such was the situation of Turkey at the moment when her Grecian vassal
prepared to trample on her yoke. In her European territories she
reckoned, at the utmost, eight millions of subjects. But these, besides
being more or less in a semi-barbarous condition, and scattered over a
very wide surface of country, were so much divided by origin, by
language, and religion, that, without the support of her Asiatic arm,
she could not, according to the general opinion, have stood at all. The
rapidity of her descent, it is true, had been arrested by the energy of
her Sultans during the first twenty years of the nineteenth century.
But for the last thirty of the eighteenth she had made a headlong
progress downwards. So utterly, also, were the tables turned, that,
whereas in the fifteenth century her chief superiority over Christendom
had been in the three points of artillery, discipline, and fixed
revenue, precisely in these three she had sunk into utter
insignificance, whilst all Christendom had been continually improving.
Selim and Mahmoud indeed had made effectual reforms in the corps of
gunners, as we have said, and had raised it to the amount of sixty
thousand men; so that at present they have respectable field-artillery,
whereas previously they had only heavy battering-trains. But the
defects in discipline cannot be remedied, so long as the want of a
settled revenue obliges the Sultan to rely upon hurried levies from the
provincial militias of police. Turkey, however, might be looked upon as
still formidable for internal purposes, in the haughty and fanatical
character of her Moslem subjects. And we may add, as a concluding
circumstance of some interest, in this sketch of her modern condition,
that pretty nearly the same European territories as were assigned to
the eastern Roman empire at the time of its separation from the
western, were included within the frontier line of Turkey, on the first of
January, 1821.

Precisely in this year commenced the Grecian revolution. Concurrently
with the decay of her oppressor the Sultan, had been the prodigious
growth of her patron the Czar. In what degree she looked up to that
throne, and the intrigues which had been pursued with a view to that
connection, may be seen (as we have already noticed) in Eton's Turkey--
a book which attracted a great deal of notice about thirty years ago.
Meantime, besides this secret reliance on Russian countenance or aid,
Greece had since that era received great encouragement to revolt from
the successful experiment in that direction made by the Turkish
province of Servia. In 1800, Czerni George came forward as the asserter
of Servian independence, and drove the Ottomans out of that province.
_Personally_ he was not finally successful. But his example
outlived him; and, after fifteen years' struggle, Servia (says Mr.
Gordon) offered "the unwonted spectacle of a brave and armed Christian
nation living under its own laws in the heart of Turkey," and retaining
no memorial of its former servitude, but the payment of a slender and
precarious tribute to the Sultan, with a _verbal_ profession of
allegiance to his sceptre. Appearances were thus saved to the pride of
the haughty Moslem by barren concessions which cost no real sacrifice
to the substantially victorious Servian.

Examples, however, are thrown away upon a people utterly degraded by
long oppression. And the Greeks were pretty nearly in that condition.
"It would, no doubt," says Mr. Gordon, "be possible to cite a more
_cruel_ oppression than that of the Turks towards their Christian
subjects, but none _so fitted to break men's spirit_." The Greeks,
in fact (under which name are to be understood, not only those who
speak Greek, but the Christian Albanians of Roumelia and the Morea,
speaking a different language, but united with the Greeks in spiritual
obedience to the same church), were, in the emphatic phrase of Mr.
Gordon, "the slaves of slaves:" that is to say, not only were they
liable to the universal tyranny of the despotic Divan, but "throughout
the empire they were in the habitual intercourse of life subjected to
vexations, affronts, and exactions, from Mahometans of every rank.
Spoiled of their goods, insulted in their religion and domestic honor,
they could rarely obtain justice. The slightest flash of courageous
resentment brought down swift destruction on their heads; and cringing
humility alone enabled them to live in ease, or even in safety."
Stooping under this iron yoke of humiliation, we have reason to wonder
that the Greeks preserved sufficient nobility of mind to raise so much
as their wishes in the direction of independence. In a condition of
abasement, from which a simple act of apostasy was at once sufficient
to raise them to honor and wealth, "and from the meanest serfs gathered
them to the caste of oppressors," we ought not to wonder that some of
the Greeks should be mean, perfidious, and dissembling, but rather that
any (as Mr. Gordon says) "had courage to adhere to their religion, and
to eat the bread of affliction." But noble aspirations are fortunately
indestructible in human nature. And in Greece the lamp of independence
of spirit had been partially kept alive by the existence of a native
militia, to whom the Ottoman government, out of mere necessity, had
committed the local defence. These were called _Armatoles_ (or
Gendarmerie); their available strength was reckoned by Pouqueville (for
the year 1814) at ten thousand men; and, as they were a very effectual
little host for maintaining, from age to age, the "true faith militant"
of Greece, namely, that a temporary and a disturbed occupation of the
best lands in the country did not constitute an absolute conquest on
the part of the Moslems, most of whom flocked for security with their
families into the stronger towns; and, as their own martial appearance,
with arms in their hands, lent a very plausible countenance to their
insinuations that they, the Christian Armatoles, were the true _bona
fide_ governors and possessors of the land under a Moslem Suzerain;
and, as the general spirit of hatred to Turkish insolence was not
merely maintained in their own local stations, but also propagated thence with activity to every part of
Greece;--it may be interesting to hear Mr. Gordon's account of their
peculiar composition and habits.

"The Turks," says he, "from the epoch of Mahommed the Second, did not
(unless in Thessaly) generally settle there. Beyond Mount ta, although
they seized the best lands, the Mussulman inhabitants were chiefly
composed of the garrisons of towns with their families. Finding it
impossible to keep in subjection with a small force so many rugged
cantons, peopled by a poor and hardy race, and to hold in check the
robbers of Albania, the Sultans embraced the same policy which has
induced them to court the Greek hierarchy, and respect ecclesiastical
property,--by enlisting in their service the armed bands that they
could not destroy. When wronged or insulted, these Armatoles threw off
their allegiance, infested the roads, and pillaged the country; while
such of the peasants as were driven to despair by acts of oppression
joined their standard; the term Armatole was then exchanged for that of
Klefthis [_Kleptćs_] or Thief, a profession esteemed highly
honorable, when it was exercised sword in hand at the expense of the
Moslems. Even in their
quietest mood, these soldiers curbed Turkish tyranny; for, the captains
and Christian primates of districts understanding each other, the
former, by giving to some of their men a hint to desert and turn
Klefts, could easily circumvent Mahometans who came on a mission
disagreeable to the latter. The habits and manners of the Armatoles,
living among forests and in mountain passes, were necessarily rude and
simple: their magnificence consisted in adorning with silver their
guns, pistols, and daggers; their amusements, in shooting at a mark,
dancing, and singing the exploits of the most celebrated chiefs.
Extraordinary activity, and endurance of hardships and fatigue, made
them formidable light troops in their native fastnesses; wrapped in
shaggy cloaks, they slept on the ground, defying the elements; and the
pure mountain air gave them robust health. Such were the warriors that,
in the very worst times, kept alive a remnant of Grecian spirit."

But all these facts of history, or institutions of policy, nay, even
the more violent appeals to the national pride in such memorable
transactions as the expatriation of the illustrious Suliotes (as also
of some eminent predatory chieftains from the Morea), were, after all,
no more than indirect excitements of the insurrectionary spirit. If it
were possible that any adequate occasion should arise for combining the
Greeks in one great movement of resistance, such continued irritations
must have the highest value, as keeping alive the national spirit,
which must finally be relied on to improve it and to turn it to
account; but it was not to be expected that any such local irritations
could ever of themselves avail to create an occasion of sufficient
magnitude for imposing silence on petty dissensions, and for organizing
into any unity of effort a country so splintered and naturally cut into
independent chambers as that of Greece. That task, transcending the
strength (as might seem) of any real agencies or powers then existing
in Greece, was assumed by a mysterious, and, in
some sense, a fictitious society of corresponding members, styling
itself the _Hetćria_. A more astonishing case of mighty effects
prepared and carried on to their accomplishment by small means,
magnifying their own extent through great zeal and infinite
concealment, and artifices the most subtle, is not to be found in
history. The _secret tribunal_ of the middle ages is not to be
compared with it for the depth and expansion of its combinations, or
for the impenetrability of its masque. Nor is there in the whole annals
of man a manoeuvre so admirable as that, by which this society,
silently effecting its own transfiguration, and recasting as in a
crucible its own form, organs, and most essential functions, contrived,
by mere force of seasonable silence, or by the very pomp of mystery, to
carry over from the first or innoxious model of the Hetćria, to its new
organization, all those weighty names of kings or princes who would not
have given their sanction to any association having political objects,
however artfully veiled. The early history of the Hetćria is shrouded
in the same mystery as the whole course of its political movements.
Some suppose that Alexander Maurocordato, ex-Hospodar of Wallachia,
during his long exile in Russia, founded it for the promotion of
education, about the beginning of the present century. Others ascribe
it originally to Riga. At all events, its purposes were purely
intellectual in its earliest form. In 1815, in consequence chiefly of
the disappointment which the Greeks met with in their dearest hopes
from the Congress of Vienna, the Hetćria first assumed a political
character under the secret influence of Count Capodistria, of Corfu,
who, having entered the Russian service as mere private secretary to
Admiral Tchitchagoff, in 1812, had, in a space of three years,
insinuated himself into the favor of the Czar, so far as to have become
his private secretary, and a cabinet minister of Russia. He, however,
still masked his final objects under plans of literature and scientific
improvement. In deep shades he organized a vast apparatus of agents and
apostles; and then retired behind the curtain to watch or to direct the
working of his blind machine. It is an evidence of some latent nobility
in the Greek character, in the midst of that levity with which all
Europe taxes it, that never, except once, were the secrets of the
society betrayed; nor was there the least ground for jealousy offered
either to the stupid Moslems, in the very centre of whom, and round
about them, the conspiracy was daily advancing, or even to the rigorous
police of Moscow, where the Hetćria had its head-quarters. In the
single instance of treachery which occurred, it happened that the
Zantiote, who made the discovery to Ali Pacha on a motion of revenge,
was himself too slenderly and too vaguely acquainted with the final
purposes of the Hetćria for effectual mischief, having been fortunately
admitted only to its lowest degree of initiation; so that all passed
off without injury to the cause, or even personally to any of its
supporters. There were, in fact, five degrees in the Hetćria. A
candidate of the lowest class (styled _Adelphoi_, or brothers),
after a minute examination of his past life and connections, and after
taking a dreadful oath, under impressive circumstances, to be faithful
in all respects to the society and his afflicted country, and even to
assassinate his nearest and dearest relation, if detected in treachery,
was instructed only in the general fact that a design was on foot to
ameliorate the condition of Greece. The next degree of _Systimenoi_,
or bachelors, who were selected with more anxious discrimination,
were informed that this design was to move towards its object
_by means of a revolution_. The third class, called _Priests
of Eleusis_, were chosen from the aristocracy; and to them it
was made known that _this revolution was near at hand_; and,
also, that there were in the society higher ranks than their own.
The fourth class was that of the _prelates_; and to this order,
which never exceeded the number of one hundred and sixteen, and
comprehended the leading men of the nation, the most unreserved
information was given upon all the secrets of the Hetćria; after which
they were severally appointed to a particular district, as
superintendent of its interests, and as manager of the whole
correspondence on its concerns with the Grand Arch. This, the crowning
order and key-stone of the society, was reputed to comprehend sixteen
"mysterious and illustrious names," amongst which were obscurely
whispered those of the Czar, the Crown Prince of Bavaria and of
Wurtemburg, of the Hospodar of Wallachia, of Count Capodistria, and
some others. The orders of the Grand Arch were written in cipher, and
bore a seal having in sixteen compartments the same number of initial
letters. The revenue which it commanded must have been considerable;
for the lowest member, on his noviciate, was expected to give at least
fifty piastres (at this time about two pounds sterling); and those of
the higher degrees gave from three hundred to one thousand each. The
members communicated with each other, in mixed society, by masonic
signs.

It cannot be denied that a secret society, with the grand and almost
awful purposes of the Hetćria, spite of some taint which it had
received in its early stages from the spirit of German mummery, is
fitted to fill the imagination, and to command homage from the coldest.
Whispers circulating from mouth to mouth of some vast conspiracy mining
subterraneously beneath the very feet of their accursed oppressors;
whispers of a great deliverer at hand, whose mysterious _Labarum_,
or mighty banner of the Cross, was already dimly descried through
northern mists, and whose eagles were already scenting the carnage and
"savor of death" from innumerable hosts of Moslems; whispers of a
revolution which was again to call, as with the trumpet of
resurrection, from the grave, the land of Timoleon and Epaminondas;
such were the preludings, low and deep, to the tempestuous overture of
revolt and patriotic battle which now ran through every nook of Greece,
and caused every ear to tingle.

The knowledge that this mighty cause must be sowed in dishonor,--
propagated, that is, in respect to the knowledge of its plans, by
redoubled cringings to their brutal masters, in order to shield it from
suspicion,--but that it would probably be reaped in honor; the belief
that the poor Grecian, so abject and trampled under foot, would soon
reappear amongst the nations who had a name, in something of his
original beauty and power; these dim but elevating perceptions, and
these anticipations, gave to every man the sense of an ennobling secret
confided to his individual honor, and, at the same time, thrilled his
heart with sympathetic joy, from approaching glories that were to prove
a personal inheritance to his children. Over all Greece a sense of
power, dim and vast, brooded for years; and a mighty phantom, under the
mysterious name of _Arch_, in whose cloudy equipage were descried,
gleaming at intervals, the crowns and sceptres of great potentates,
sustained, whilst it agitated their hearts. _London_ was one of
the secret watchwords in their impenetrable cipher; _Moscow_ was a
countersign; Bavaria and Austria bore mysterious parts in the drama;
and, though no sound was heard, nor voice given to the powers that were
working, yet, as if by mere force of secret sympathy, all mankind who
were worthy to participate in the enterprise seemed to be linked in
brotherhood with Greece. These notions were, much of them, mere
phantasms and delusions; but they were delusions of mighty efficacy for
arming the hearts of this oppressed country against the terrors that
must be faced; and for the whole of them Greece was indebted to the
Hetćria, and to its organized agency of apostles (as they were
technically called), who compassed land and sea as pioneers for the
coming crusade.

By 1820 Greece was thoroughly inoculated with the spirit of resistance;
all things were ready, so far, perhaps, as it was possible that they
should ever be made ready under the eyes and scimitars of the enemy.
Now came the question of time,--_when_ was the revolt to begin?
Some contend, says Mr. Gordon, that the Hetćria should have waited for
a century, by which time they suppose that the growth of means in favor
of Greece would have concurred with a more than corresponding decay in
her enemy. But, to say nothing of the extreme uncertainty which attends
such remote speculation, and the utter impossibility of training men
with no personal hopes to labor for the benefit of distant generations,
there was one political argument against that course, which Mr. Gordon
justly considers unanswerable. It is this: Turkey in Europe has been
long tottering on its basis. Now, were the attempt delayed until Russia
had displaced her and occupied her seat, Greece would then have
received her liberty as a boon from the conqueror; and the construction
would have been that she held it by sufferance, and under a Russian
warrant. This argument is conclusive. But others there were who fancied
that 1825 was the year at which all the preparations for a successful
revolt could have been matured. Probably some gain in such a case would
have been balanced against some loss. But it is not necessary to
discuss that question. Accident, it was clear, might bring on the first
hostile movement at any hour, when the _minds_ of all men were
prepared, let the means in other respects be as deficient as they
might. Already, in 1820, circumstances made it evident that the
outbreak of the insurrection could not long be delayed. And,
accordingly, in the following year all Greece was in flames.

This affair of 1820 has a separate interest of its own, connected with
the character of the very celebrated person to whom it chiefly relates;
but we notice it chiefly as the real occasion, the momentary spark,
which, alighting upon the combustibles, by this time accumulated
everywhere in Greece, caused a general explosion of the long-hoarded
insurrectionary fury. Ali Pacha, the far-famed vizier of Yannina, had
long been hated profoundly by the Sultan, who in the same proportion
loved and admired his treasures. However, he was persuaded to wait for
his death, which could not (as it seemed) be far distant, rather than
risk anything upon the chances of war. And in this prudent resolution
he would have persevered, but for an affront which he could not
overlook. An Albanian, named Ismael Pasho Bey, once a member of Ali's
household, had incurred his master's deadly hatred; and, flying from
his wrath to various places under various disguises, had at length
taken refuge in Constantinople, and there sharpened the malice of Ali
by attaching himself to his enemies. Ali was still further provoked by
finding that Ismael had won the Sultan's favor, and obtained an
appointment in the palace. Mastered by his fury, Ali hired assassins to
shoot his enemy in the very midst of Constantinople, and under the very
eyes of imperial protection. The assassins failed, having only wounded
him; they were arrested, and disclosed the name of their employer.

Here was an insult which could not be forgiven: Ali Pacha was declared
a rebel and a traitor; and solemnly excommunicated by the head of the
Mussulman law. The Pachas of Europe received orders to march against
him; and a squadron was fitted out to attack him by sea.

In March, 1820, Ali became acquainted with these strong measures; which
at first he endeavored to parry by artifice and bribery. But, finding
_that_ mode of proceeding absolutely without hope, he took the
bold resolution of throwing himself, in utter defiance, upon the native
energies of his own ferocious heart. Having, however, but small
reliance on his Mahometan troops in a crisis of this magnitude, he
applied for Christian succors, and set himself to _court_ the
Christians generally. As a first step, he restored the Armatoles--that
very body whose suppression had been so favorite a measure of his
policy, and pursued so long, so earnestly, and so injuriously to his
credit amongst the Christian part of the population. It happened, at
the first opening of the campaign, that the Christians were equally
courted by the Sultan's generalissimo, Solyman, the Pacha of Thessaly.
For this, however, that Pacha was removed and decapitated; and a new
leader was now appointed in the person of that very enemy, Ismael
Pasho, whose attempted murder had brought the present storm upon Ali.
Ismael was raised to the rank of Serasker (or generalissimo), and was
also made Pacha of Yannina and Del vino. Three other armies, besides a
fleet under the Captain Bey, advanced upon Ali's territories
simultaneously from different quarters. But at that time, in defiance
of these formidable and overwhelming preparations, bets were strongly
in Ali's favor amongst all who were acquainted with his resources: for
he had vast treasures, fortresses of great strength, inexhaustible
supplies of artillery and ammunition, a country almost inaccessible,
and fifteen thousand light troops, whom Mr. Gordon, upon personal
knowledge, pronounces "excellent."

Scarcely had the war commenced, when Ali was abandoned by almost the
whole of his partisans, in mere hatred of his execrable cruelty and
tyrannical government. To Ali, however, this defection brought no
despondency; and with unabated courage he prepared to defend himself to
the last, in three castles, with a garrison of three thousand men. That
he might do so with entire effect, he began by destroying his own
capital of Yannina, lest it should afford shelter to the enemy. Still
his situation would have been most critical, but for the state of
affairs in the enemy's camp. The Serasker was attended by more than
twenty other Pashas. But they were all at enmity with each other. One
of them, and the bravest, was even poisoned by the Serasker. Provisions
were running short, in consequence of their own dissensions. Winter was
fast approaching; the cannonading had produced no conspicuous effect;
and the soldiers were disbanding. In this situation, the Sultan's
lieutenants again saw the necessity of courting aid from the Christian
population of the country. Ali, on his part, never scrupled to bid
against them at any price; and at length, irritated by the ill-usage of
the Turks on their first entrance, and disgusted with the obvious
insincerity of their reluctant and momentary kindness, some of the
bravest Christian tribes (especially the celebrated Suliotes) consented
to take Ali's bribes, forgot his past outrages and unnumbered
perfidies, and, reading his sincerity in the extremity of his peril,
these bravest of the brave ranged themselves amongst the Sultan's
enemies. During the winter they gained some splendid successes; other
alienated friends came back to Ali; and even some Mahometan Beys were
persuaded to take up arms in his behalf. Upon the whole, the Turkish
Divan was very seriously alarmed; and so much so, that it superseded
the Serasker Ismael, replacing him with the famous Kourshid Pacha, at
that time viceroy of the Morea. And so ended the year 1820.

This state of affairs could not escape the attention of the vigilant
Hetćria. Here was Ali Pacha, hitherto regarded as an insurmountable
obstacle in their path, absolutely compelled by circumstances to be
their warmest friend. The Turks again, whom no circumstances could
entirely disarm, were yet crippled for the time, and their whole
attention preoccupied by another enemy, most alarming to their policy,
and most tempting to their cupidity. Such an opportunity it seemed
unpardonable to neglect. Accordingly, it was resolved to begin the
insurrection. At its head was placed Prince Alexander Ypsilanti, a son
of that Hospodar of Wallachia whose deposition by the Porte had
produced the Russian war of 1806. This prince's qualifications
consisted in his high birth, in his connection with Russia (for he had
risen to the rank of major-general in that service), and, finally (if
such things can deserve a mention), in an agreeable person and manners.
For all other and higher qualifications he was wholly below the
situation and the urgency of the crisis. His first error was in the
choice of his ground. For some reasons, which are not sufficiently
explained,--possibly on account of his family connection with those
provinces,--he chose to open the war in Moldavia and Wallachia. This
resolution he took in spite of every warning, and the most intelligent
expositions of the absolute necessity that, to be at all effectual, the
first stand should be made in Greece. He thought otherwise; and,
managing the campaign after his own ideas, he speedily involved himself
in quarrels, and his army, through the perfidy of a considerable
officer, in ruinous embarrassments. This unhappy campaign is
circumstantially narrated by Mr. Gordon in his first book; but, as it
never crossed the Danube, and had no connection with Greece except by
its purposes, we shall simply rehearse the great outline of its course.
The signal for insurrection was given in January, 1821; and Prince
Ypsilanti took the field, by crossing the Pruth in March. Early in
April he received a communication from the Emperor of Russia, which at
once prostrated his hopes before an enemy was seen. He was formally
disavowed by that prince, erased from his army-list, and severely
reproached for his "_folly and ingratitude_," in letters from two
members of the Russian cabinet; and on the 9th of April this fact was
publicly notified in Yassy, the capital of Moldavia, by the Russian
consul-general. His army at this time consisted of three thousand men,
which, however, was afterwards reinforced, but with no gunpowder except
what was casually intercepted, and no lead except some that had been
stripped from the roof of an ancient cathedral. On the 12th of May the
Pacha of Ibrail opened the campaign. A few days after, the Turkish
troops began to appear in considerable force; and on the 8th of June an
alarm was suddenly given "that the white turbans were upon them." In
the engagement which followed, the insurgent army gave way; and, though
their loss was much smaller than that of the Turks, yet, from the many
blunders committed, the consequences were disastrous; and, had the
Turks pursued, there would on that day have been an end of the
insurrection. But far worse and more decisive was the subsequent
disaster of the 17th. Ypsilanti had been again reinforced; and his
advanced guard had surprised a Turkish detachment of cavalry in such a
situation that their escape seemed impossible. Yet all was ruined by
one officer of rank, who got drunk, and advanced with an air of
bravado--followed, on a principle of honor, by a sacred battalion
[_hieros lochos_], composed of five hundred Greek volunteers, of
birth and education, the very _élite_ of the insurgent infantry.
The Turks gave themselves up for lost; but, happening to observe that
this drunkard seemed unsupported by other parts of the army, they
suddenly mounted, came down upon the noble young volunteers before they
could even form in square; and nearly the whole, disdaining to fly,
were cut to pieces on the ground. An officer of rank, and a brave man,
appalled by this hideous disaster, the affair of a few moments, rode up
to the spot, and did all he could to repair it. But the cowardly
drunkard had fled at the first onset, with all his Arnauts; panic
spread rapidly; and the whole force of five thousand men fled before
eight hundred Turks, leaving four hundred men dead on the field, of
whom three hundred and fifty belonged to the sacred battalion.

The Turks, occupied with gathering a trophy of heads, neglected to
pursue. But the work was done. The defeated advance fell back upon the
main body; and that same night the whole army, panic-struck, ashamed,
and bewildered, commenced a precipitate retreat. From this moment
Prince Ypsilanti thought only of saving himself. This purpose he
effected in a few days, by retreating into Austria, from which
territory he issued his final order of the day, taxing his army, in
violent and unmeasured terms, with cowardice and disobedience. This was
in a limited sense true; many distinctions, however, were called for in
mere justice; and the capital defects, after all, were in himself. His
plan was originally bad; and, had it been better, he was quite unequal
to the execution of it. The results were unfortunate to all concerned
in it. Ypsilanti himself was arrested by Austria, and thrown into the
unwholesome prison of Mongatz, where, after languishing for six years,
he perished miserably. Some of the subordinate officers prolonged the
struggle in a guerilla style for some little time; but all were finally
suppressed. Many were put to death; many escaped into neutral ground;
and it is gratifying to add, that of two traitors amongst the higher
officers, one was detected and despatched in a summary way of vengeance
by his own associates; the other, for some unexplained reason, was
beheaded by his Turkish friends at the very moment when he had put
himself into their power, in fearless obedience to their own summons to
_come and receive his well-merited reward_, and under an express
assurance from the Pacha of Silistria that he was impatiently waiting
to invest him with a pelisse of honor. Such faith is kept with
traitors; such faith be ever kept with the betrayers of nations and
their holiest hopes! Though in this instance the particular motives of
the Porte are still buried in mystery.

Thus terminated the first rash enterprise, which resulted from the too
tempting invitation held out in the rebellion then agitating Epirus,
locking up, as it did, and neutralizing, so large a part of the
disposable Turkish forces. To this we return. Kourshid Pacha quitted
the Morea with a large body of troops, in the first days of January,
1821, and took the command of the army already before Yannina. But,
with all his great numerical superiority to the enemy with whom he
contended, and now enjoying undisturbed union in his own camp, he found
it impossible to make his advances rapidly. Though in hostility to the
Porte, and though now connected with Christian allies, Ali Pacha was
yet nominally a Mahometan. Hence it had been found impossible as yet to
give any color of an anti-Christian character to the war; and the
native Mahometan chieftains had therefore no scruple in coalescing with
the Christians of Epirus, and making joint cause with Ali. Gradually,
from the inevitable vexations incident to the march and residence of a
large army, the whole population became hostile to Kourshid; and their
remembrance of Ali's former oppressions, if not effaced, was yet
suspended in the presence of a nuisance so immediate and so generally
diffused; and most of the Epirots turned their arms against the Porte.
The same feelings which governed _them_ soon spread to the provinces
of Etolia and Acarnania; or rather, perhaps, being previously ripe
for revolt, these provinces resolved to avail themselves of the
same occasion. Missolonghi now became the centre of rebellion; and
Kourshid's difficulties were daily augmenting. In July of this year
(1821) these various insurgents, actively cooperating, defeated the
Serasker in several actions, and compelled a Pacha to lay down his arms
on the road between Yannina and Souli. It was even proposed by the
gallant partisan, Mark Bozzaris, that all should unite to hem in the
Serasker; but a wound, received in a skirmish, defeated this plan. In
September following, however, the same Mark intercepted and routed
Hassan Pacha in a defile on his march to Yannina; and in general the
Turks were defeated everywhere except at the headquarters of the
Serasker, and with losses in men enormously disproportioned to the
occasions. This arose partly from the necessity under which they lay of
attacking expert musketeers under cover of breastworks, and partly from
their own precipitance and determination to carry everything by summary
force; "whereas," says Mr. Gordon, "a little patience would surely have
caused them to succeed, and at least saved them much dishonor, and
thousands of lives thrown away in mere wantonness." But, in spite of
all blunders, and every sort of failure elsewhere, the Serasker was
still advancing slowly towards his main objects--the reduction of Ali
Pacha. And by the end of October, on getting possession of an important
part of Ali's works, he announced to the Sultan that he should soon be
able to send him the traitor's head, for that he was already reduced to
six hundred men. A little before this, however, the celebrated
Maurocordato, with other persons of influence, had arrived at
Missolonghi with the view of cementing a general union of Christian and
Mahometan forces against the Turks. In this he was so far successful,
that in November a combined attack was made upon Ismael, the old enemy
of Ali, and three other Pachas, shut up in the town of Arta. This
attack succeeded partially; but it was attempted at a moment
dramatically critical, and with an effect ruinous to the whole
campaign, as well as that particular attack. The assailing party, about
thirty-four hundred men, were composed in the proportion of two
Christians to one Mahometan. They had captured one half of the town;
and, Mark Bozzaris having set this on fire to prevent plundering, the
four Pachas were on the point of retreating under cover of the smoke.
At that moment arrived a Mahometan of note, instigated by Kourshid, who
was able to persuade those of his own faith that the Christians were
not fighting with any sincere views of advantage to Ali, but with
ulterior purposes hostile to Mahometanism itself. On this, the
Christian division of the army found themselves obliged to retire
without noise, in order to escape their own allies, now suddenly united
with the four Pachas. Nor, perhaps, would even this have been effected,
but for the precaution of Mark Bozzaris in taking hostages from two
leading Mahometans. Thus failed the last diversion in favor of Ali
Pacha, who was henceforward left to his own immediate resources. All
the Mahometan tribes now ranged themselves on the side of Kourshid; and
the winter of 1821-2 passed away without further disturbance in Epirus.

Meantime, during the absence of Kourshid Pacha from the Morea, the
opportunity had not been lost for raising the insurrection in that
important part of Greece. Kourshid had marched early in January, 1821;
and already in February symptoms of the coming troubles appeared at
Patrass, "the most flourishing and populous city of the Peloponnesus,
the emporium of its trade, and residence of the foreign consuls and
merchants." Its population was about eighteen thousand, of which number
two thirds were Christian. In March, when rumors had arrived of the
insurrection beyond the Danube, under Alexander Ypsilanti, the
fermentation became universal; and the Turks of Patrass hastily
prepared for defence. By the twenty-fifth, the Greeks had purchased all
the powder and lead which could be had; and about the second of April
they raised the standard of the Cross. Two days after this, fighting
began at Patrass. The town having been set on fire, "the Turkish castle
threw shot and shells at random; the two parties fought amongst the
ruins, and massacred each other without mercy; the only prisoners that
were spared owed their lives to fanaticism; some Christian youths being
circumcised by the Mollahs, and some Turkish boys baptized by the
priests."

"While the commencement of the war," says Mr. Gordon, "was thus
signalized by the ruin of a flourishing city, the insurrection gained
ground with wonderful rapidity; and from mountain to mountain, and
village to village, propagated itself to the furthest corner of the
Peloponnesus. Everywhere the peasants flew to arms; and those Turks who
resided in the open country or unfortified towns were either cut to
pieces, or forced to fly into strongholds." On the second of April, the
flag of independence was hoisted in Achaia. On the ninth, a Grecian
senate met at Calamata, in Messenia, having for its president
Mavromichalis, Prince or Bey of Maina, a rugged territory in the
ancient Sparta, famous for its hardy race of robbers and pirates.

On the sixth of April, the insurrection had spread to the narrow
territory of Megaris, situated to the north of the isthmus. The
Albanian population of this country, amounting to about ten thousand,
and employed by the Porte to guard the defiles of the entrance into
Peloponnesus, raised the standard of revolt, and marched to invest the
Acrocorinthus. In the Messenian territory, the Bishop of Modon, having
made his guard of Janissaries drunk, cut the whole of them to pieces;
and then encamping on the heights of Navarin, his lordship blockaded
that fortress. The abruptness of these movements, and their almost
simultaneous origin at distances so considerable, sufficiently prove
how ripe the Greeks were for this revolt as respected temper; and in
other modes of preparation they never _could_ have been ripe
whilst overlooked by Turkish masters. That haughty race now retreated
from all parts of the Morea, within the ramparts of Tripolizza.

In the first action which occurred, the Arcadian Greeks did not behave
well; they fled at the very sound of the Moslem tread. Colocotroni
commanded; and he rallied them again; but again they deserted him at
the sight of their oppressors; "and I," said Colocotroni afterwards,
when relating the circumstances of this early affair, "having with me
only ten companions including my horse, sat down in a bush and wept."

Meantime, affairs went ill at Patrass. Yussuf Pacha, having been
detached from Epirus to Euba by the Scrasker, heard on his route of
the insurrection in Peloponnesus. Upon which, altering his course, he
sailed to Patrass, and reached it on the fifteenth of April. This was
Palm Sunday, and it dawned upon the Greeks with evil omens. First came
a smart shock of earthquake; next a cannonade announcing the approach
of the Pacha; and, lastly, an Ottoman brig of war, which saluted the
fort and cast anchor before the town.

The immediate consequences were disastrous. The Greeks retreated; and
the Pacha detached Kihaya-Bey, a Tartar officer of distinguished
energy, with near three thousand men, to the most important points of
the revolt. On the fifth of May, the Tartar reached Corinth, but found
the siege already raised. Thence he marched to Argos, sending before
him a requisition for bread. He was answered by the men of Argos that
they had no bread, but only powder and ball at his service. This
threat, however, proved a gasconade; the Kihaya advanced in three
columns; cavalry on each wing, and infantry in the centre; on which,
after a single discharge, the Argives fled. Their general, fighting bravely, was killed, together
with seven hundred others, and fifteen hundred women captured. The
Turks, having sacked and burned Argos, then laid siege to a monastery,
which surrendered upon terms; and it is honorable to the memory of this
Tartar general, that, according to the testimony of Mr. Gordon, at a
time when the war was managed with merciless fury and continual
perfidies on both sides, he observed the terms with rigorous fidelity,
treated all his captives with the utmost humanity, and even liberated
the women.

Thus far the tide had turned against the Greeks; but now came a
decisive reaction in their favor; and, as if forever to proclaim the
folly of despair, just at the very crisis when it was least to have
been expected, the Kihaya was at this point joined by the Turks of
Tripolizza, and was now reputed to be fourteen thousand strong. This
proved to be an exaggeration; but the subsequent battle is the more
honorable to those who believed it. At a council of war, in the Greek
camp, the prevailing opinion was that an action could not prudently be
risked. One man thought otherwise; this was Anagnostoras; he, by urging
the desolations which would follow a retreat, brought over the rest to
his opinion; and it was resolved to take up a position at Valtezza, a
village three hours' march from Tripolizza. Thither, on the twenty-
seventh of May, the Kihaya arrived with five thousand men, in three
columns, having left Tripolizza at dawn; and immediately raised
redoubts opposite to those of the Greeks, and placed three heavy pieces
of cannon in battery. He hoped to storm the position; but, if he should
fail, he had a reason for still anticipating a victory, and _that_
was the situation of the fountains, which must soon have drawn the
Greeks out of their position, as they had water only for twenty-four
hours' consumption.

The battle commenced: and the first failure of the Kihaya was in the
cannonade; for his balls, passing over the Greeks, fell amongst a corps
of his own troops. These now made three assaults; but were repulsed in
all. Both sides kept up a fire till night; and each expected that his
enemy would retire in the darkness. The twenty-eighth, however, found
the two armies still in the same positions. The battle was renewed for
five hours; and then the Kihaya, finding his troops fatigued, and that
his retreat was likely to be intercepted by Nikitas (a brave partisan
officer bred to arms in the service of England), who was coming up by
forced marches from Argos with eight hundred men, gave the signal for
retreat. This soon became a total rout; the Kihaya lost his horse; and
the Greeks, besides taking two pieces of cannon, raised a trophy of
four hundred Moslem heads.

Such was the battle of Yaltezza, the inaugural performance of the
insurrection; and we have told it thus circumstantially, because Mr.
Gordon characterizes it as "remarkable for the moral effect it
produced;" and he does not scruple to add, that it "certainly decided
the campaign in Peloponnesus, _and perhaps even the fate of the
revolution_."

Three days after, that is, on the last day of May, 1821, followed the
victory of Doliana, in which the Kihaya, anxious to recover his lost
ground, was encountered by Nikitas. The circumstances were peculiarly
brilliant. For the Turkish general had between two and three thousand
men, besides artillery; whereas Nikitas at first sustained the attack
in thirteen barricaded houses, with no more than ninety-six soldiers,
and thirty armed peasants. After a resistance of eleven hours, he was
supported by seven hundred men; and in the end he defeated the Kihaya
with a very considerable loss.

These actions raised the enthusiasm of the Morea to a high point; and
in the mean time other parts of Greece had joined in the revolt. In the
first week of April an insurrection burst out in the eastern provinces
of Greece, Attica, Boeotia, and Phocis. The insurgents first appeared
near Livadia, one of the best cities in northern Greece. On the
thirteenth, they occupied Thebes without opposition. Immediately after,
Odysseus propagated the revolt in Phocis, where he had formerly
commanded as a lieutenant of Ali Pacha's. Next arose the Albanian
peasantry of Attica, gathering in armed bodies to the west of Athens.
Towards the end of April, the Turks, who composed one fifth of the
Athenian population (then rated at ten thousand), became greatly
agitated; and twice proposed a massacre of the Christians. This was
resisted by the humane Khadi; and the Turks, contenting themselves with
pillaging absent proprietors, began to lay up stores in the Acropolis.
With ultra Turkish stupidity, however, out of pure laziness, at this
critical moment, they confided the night duty on the ramparts of the
city to Greeks. The consequence may be supposed. On the eighth of May,
the Ottoman standard had been raised and blessed by an Tman. On the
following night, a rapid discharge of musketry, and the shouts of
_Christ has risen! Liberty! Liberty!_ proclaimed the capture of
Athens. Nearly two thousand peasants, generally armed with clubs, had
scaled the walls and forced the gates. The prisoners taken were treated
with humanity. But, unfortunately, this current of Christian sentiment
was immediately arrested by the conduct of the Turks in the Acropolis,
in killing nine hostages, and throwing over the walls some naked and
headless bodies.

The insurrection next spread to Thessaly; and at last even to
Macedonia, from the premature and atrocious violence of the Pacha of
Salonika. Apprehending a revolt, he himself drew it on, by cutting off
the heads of the Christian merchants and clergy (simply as a measure of
precaution), and enforcing his measures on the peasantry by military
execution. Unfortunately, from its extensive plains, this country is
peculiarly favorable to the evolutions of the Turkish cavalry; the
insurgents were, therefore, defeated in several actions; and ultimately
took refuge in great numbers amongst the convents on Mount Athos, which
also were driven into revolt by the severity of the Pacha. Here the
fugitives were safe from the sabres of their merciless pursuers; but,
unless succored by sea, ran a great risk of perishing by famine. But a
more important accession to the cause of independence, within one month
from its first outbreak in the Morea, occurred in the Islands of the
Archipelago. The three principal of these in modern times, are Hydra,
Spezzia, and Psarra. They had been colonized in the preceding
century, by some poor families from Peloponnesus and Ionia. At that
time they had gained a scanty subsistence as fishermen. Gradually they
became merchants and seamen. Being the best sailors in the Sultan's
dominions, they had obtained some valuable privileges, amongst which
was that of exemption from Turkish magistrates; so that, if they could
not boast of _autonomy_, they had at least the advantage of
executing the bad laws of Turkish imposition by chiefs of their own
blood. And they had the further advantage of paying but a moderate
tribute to the Sultan. So favored, their commerce had flourished beyond
all precedent. And latterly, when the vast extension of European
warfare had created first-rate markets for grain, selecting, of course,
those which were highest at the moment, they sometimes doubled their
capitals in two voyages; and seven or eight such trips in a year were
not an unusual instance of good fortune. What had been the result, may
be collected from the following description, which Mr. Gordon gives us,
of Hydra: "Built on a sterile rock, which does not offer, at any
season, the least trace of vegetation, it is one of the best cities in
the Levant, and _infinitely superior to any other in Greece_; the
houses are all constructed of white stone; and those of the
aristocracy--erected at an immense expense, floored with costly
marbles, and splendidly furnished--_might pass for palaces even in
the capitals of Italy_. Before the revolution, poverty was unknown;
all classes being comfortably lodged, clothed, and fed. Its inhabitants
at this epoch exceeded twenty thousand, of whom four thousand were
able-bodied seamen."

The other islands were, with few exceptions, arid rocks; and most of
them had the inestimable advantage of being unplagued with a Turkish
population. Enjoying that precious immunity, it may be wondered why
they should have entered into the revolt. But for this there were two
great reasons: they were ardent Christians in the first place, and
disinterested haters of Mahometanism on its own merits; secondly, as
the most powerful nautical confederacy in the Levant, they anticipated a
large booty from captures at sea. In that expectation, at first, they
were not disappointed. But it was a source of wealth soon exhausted;
for, naturally, as soon as their ravages became known, the Mussulmans
ceased to navigate. Spezzia was the first to hoist the independent
flag; this was on the ninth of April, 1821. Psarra immediately followed
her example. Hydra hesitated, and at first even declined to do so; but,
at last, on the 28th of April, this island also issued a manifesto of
adherence to the patriotic cause. On the third of May, a squadron of
eleven Hydriot and seven Spezzia vessels sailed from Hydra, having on
the mainmast "an address to the people of the Egean sea, inviting them
to rally round the national standard: an address that was received with
enthusiasm in every quarter of the Archipelago where the Turks were not
numerous enough to restrain popular feeling."

"The success of the Greek marine in this first expedition," says Mr.
Gordon, "was not confined to merely spreading the insurrection
throughout the Archipelago: a swarm of swift armed ships swept the sea
from the Hellespont to the waters of Crete and Cyprus; captured every
Ottoman trader they met with, and put to the sword, or flung overboard,
the Mahometan crews and passengers; for the contest already assumed a
character of terrible ferocity. It would be vain to deny that they were
guilty of shocking barbarities; at the little island of Castel Rosso,
on the Karamanian shore, they butchered, in cold blood, several
beautiful Turkish females; and a great number of defenceless pilgrims
(mostly old men), who, returning from Mecca, fell into their power, off
Cyprus, were slain without mercy, because they would not renounce their
faith." Many such cases of hideous barbarity had already occurred, and
did afterwards occur, on the mainland. But this is the eternal law and
providential retribution of oppression. The tyrant teaches to his slave
the crimes and the cruelties which he inflicts; blood will have blood;
and the ferocious oppressor is involved in the natural reaction of his
own wickedness, by the frenzied retaliation of the oppressed. Now was
indeed beheld the realization of the sublime imprecation in Shakspeare:
"one spirit of the first-born Cain" did indeed reign in the hearts of
men; and now, if ever upon this earth, it seemed likely, from the
dreadful _acharnement_ which marked the war on both sides,--the
_acharnement_ of long-hoarded vengeance and maddening remembrances
in the Grecian, of towering disdain in the alarmed oppressor,--that, in
very simplicity of truth, "_Darkness would be the burier of the
dead._"

Such was the opening scene in the astonishing drama of the Greek
insurrection, which, through all its stages, was destined to move by
fire and blood, and beyond any war in human annals to command the
interest of mankind through their sterner affections. We have said that
it was eminently a romantic war; but not in the meaning with which we
apply that epithet to the semi-fabulous wars of Charlemagne and his
Paladins, or even to the Crusaders. Here are no memorable contests of
generosity; no triumphs glorified by mercy; no sacrifices of interest
the most basely selfish to martial honor; no ear on either side for the
pleadings of desolate affliction; no voice in any quarter of commanding
justice; no acknowledgment of a common nature between the belligerents;
nor sense of a participation in the same human infirmities, dangers, or
necessities. To the fugitive from the field of battle there was
scarcely a retreat; to the prisoner there was absolutely no hope. Stern
retribution, and the very rapture of vengeance, were the passions which
presided on the one side; on the other, fanaticism and the cruelty of
fear and hatred, maddened by old hereditary scorn. Wherever the war
raged there followed upon the face of the land one blank Aceldama. A
desert tracked the steps of the armies, and a desert in which was no
oasis; and the very atmosphere in which men lived and breathed was a
chaos of murderous passions. Still it is true that the war was a great
romance. For it was filled with change, and with elastic rebound from
what seemed final extinction; with the spirit of adventure carried to
the utmost limits of heroism; with self-devotion on the sublimest
scale, and the very frenzy of patriotic martyrdom; with resurrection of
everlasting hope upon ground seven times blasted by the blighting
presence of the enemy; and with flowers radiant in promise springing
forever from under the very tread of the accursed Moslem.

With respect to the name of Suli, the Suliotes themselves trace it to
an accident:--"Some old men," says the Albanian author, reciting his
own personal investigations amongst the oldest of the Suliotes,
"replied that they did not remember having any information from their
ancestors concerning the first inhabitants of Suli, except this only:
that some goat and swine herds used to lead their flocks to graze on
the mountains where Suli and Ghiafa now stand; that these mountains
were not only steep and almost inaccessible, but clothed with thickets
of wood, and infested by wild boars; that these herdsmen, being
oppressed by the tyranny of the Turks of a village called to this day
Gardichi, took the resolution of flying for a distance of six hours'
journey to this sylvan and inaccessible position, of sharing in common
the few animals which they had, and of suffering voluntarily every
physical privation, rather than submit to the slightest wrong from
their foreign tyrants. This resolution, they added, must be presumed to
have been executed with success; because we find that, in the lapse of
five or six years, these original occupants of the fastness were joined
by thirty other families. Somewhere about that time it was that they
began to awaken the jealousy of the Turks; and a certain Turk, named
Suli, went in high scorn and defiance, with many other associates, to
expel them from this strong position; but our stout forefathers met
them with arms in their hands. Suli, the leader and inciter of the
Turks, was killed outright upon the ground; and, on the very spot where
he fell, at this day stands the centre of our modern Suli, which took
its name, therefore, from that same slaughtered Turk, who was the first
insolent and malicious enemy with whom our country in its days of
infancy had to contend for its existence."

Such is the most plausible account which can now be obtained of the
_incunabula_ of this most indomitable little community, and of the
circumstances under which it acquired its since illustrious name. It
was, perhaps, natural that a little town, in the centre of insolent and
bitter enemies, should assume a name which would long convey to their
whole neighborhood a stinging lesson of mortification, and of
prudential warning against similar molestations. As to the
_chronology_ of this little state, the Albanian author assures us,
upon the testimony of the same old Suliotes, that "seventy years
before" there were barely one hundred men fit for the active duties of
war, which, in ordinary states of society, would imply a total
population of four hundred souls. That may be taken, therefore, as the
extreme limit of the Suliote population at a period of seventy years
antecedently to the date of tke conversation on which he founds his
information. But, as he has unfortunately omitted to fix the exact era
of these conversations, the whole value of his accuracy is neutralized
by his own carelessness. However, it is probable, from the internal
evidence of his book, which brings down affairs below the year 1812,
that his information was collected somewhere about 1810. We must carry
back the epoch, therefore, at which Suli had risen to a population of
four hundred, pretty nearly to the year 1740; and since, by the same
traditionary evidence, Suli had then accomplished an independent
existence through a space of eighty years, we have reason to conclude
that the very first gatherings of poor Christian herdsmen to this
sylvan sanctuary, when stung to madness by Turkish insolence and
persecution, would take place about the era of the Restoration (of our
Charles II.), that is, in 1660.

In more modern times, the Suliotes had expanded into four separate
little towns, peopled by five hundred and sixty families, from which
they were able to draw one thousand first-rate soldiers. But, by a very
politic arrangement, they had colonized with sixty-six other families
seven neighboring towns, over which, from situation, they had long been
able to exercise a military preponderance. The benefits were
incalculable which they obtained by this connection. At the first alarm
of war the fighting men retreated with no incumbrances but their arms,
ammunition, and a few days' provision, into the four towns of Suli
proper, which all lay within that ring fence of impregnable position
from which no armies could ever dislodge them; meantime, they secretly
drew supplies from the seven associate towns, which were better
situated than themselves for agriculture, and which (apparently taking
no part in the war) pursued their ordinary labors unmolested. Their
tactics were simple, but judicious; if they saw a body of five or six
thousand advancing against their position, knowing that it was idle for
them to meet such a force in the open field, they contented themselves
with detaching one hundred and fifty or two hundred men to skirmish on
their flanks, and to harass them according to the advantages of the
ground; but if they saw no more than five hundred or one thousand in
the hostile column, they then issued in equal or superior numbers, in
the certainty of beating them, striking an effectual panic into their
hearts, and also of profiting largely by plunder and by ransom.

In so small and select a community, where so much must continually
depend upon individual qualities and personal heroism, it may readily
be supposed that the women would play an important part; in fact, "the
women carry arms and fight bravely. When the men go to war, the women
bring them food and provisions; when they see their strength declining
in combat, they run to their assistance, and fight along with them;
but, if by any chance their husbands behave with cowardice, they snatch
their arms from them, and abuse them, calling them mean, and unworthy
of having a wife." Upon these feelings there has even been built a law
in Suli, which must deeply interest the pride of women in the martial
honor of their husbands; agreeably to this law, any woman whose husband
has distinguished himself in battle, upon going to a fountain to draw
water, has the liberty to drive away another woman whose husband is
tainted with the reproach of cowardice; and all who succeed her, "from
dawn to dewy eve," unless under the ban of the same withering stigma,
have the same privilege of taunting her with her husband's baseness,
and of stepping between her or her cattle until their own wants are
fully supplied.

This social consideration of the female sex, in right of their
husbands' military honors, is made available for no trifling purposes;
on one occasion it proved the absolute salvation of the tribe. In one
of the most desperate assaults made by Ali Pacha upon Suli, when that
tyrant was himself present at the head of eight thousand picked men,
animated with the promise of five hundred piastres a man, to as many as
should enter Suli, after ten hours' fighting under an enfeebling sun,
and many of the Suliote muskets being rendered useless by continual
discharges, a large body of the enemy had actually succeeded in
occupying the sacred interior of Suli itself. At that critical moment,
when Ali was in the very paroxysms of frantic exultation, the Suliote
women, seeing that the general fate hinged upon the next five minutes,
turned upon the Turks _en masse_, and with such a rapture of
sudden fury, that the conquering army was instantly broken--thrown into
panic, pursued; and, in that state of ruinous disorder, was met and
flanked by the men, who were now recovering from their defeat. The
consequences, from the nature of the ground, were fatal to the Turkish
army and enterprise; the whole camp equipage was captured; none saved
their lives but by throwing away their arms; one third of the Turks
(one half by some accounts) perished on the retreat; the rest returned
at intervals as an unarmed mob; and the bloody, perfidious Pacha
himself saved his life only by killing two horses in his haste. So
total was the rout, and so bitter the mortification of Ali, who had
seen a small band of heroic women snatch the long-sought prize out of
his very grasp, that for some weeks he shut himself up in his palace at
Yannina, would receive no visits, and issued a proclamation imposing
instant death upon any man detected in looking out at a window or other
aperture--as being _presumably_ engaged in noticing the various
expressions of his defeat which were continually returning to Yannina.

The wars, in which the adventurous courage of the Suliotes (together
with their menacing position) could not fail to involve them, were in
all eleven. The first eight of these occurred in times before the
French Revolution, and with Pachas who have left no memorials behind
them of the terrific energy or hellish perfidy which marked the
character of Ali Pacha. These Pachas, who brought armies at the lowest
of five thousand, and at the most of twelve thousand men, were
uniformly beaten; and apparently were content to be beaten. Sometimes a
Pacha was even made prisoner; but, as the simple Suliotes little understood the art of improving
advantages, the ransom was sure to be proportioned to the value of the
said Pacha's sword-arm in battle, rather than to his rank and ability
to pay; so that the terms of liberation were made ludicrously easy to
the Turkish chiefs.

These eight wars naturally had no other ultimate effect than to extend
the military power, experience, and renown, of the Suliotes. But their
ninth war placed them in collision with a new and far more perilous
enemy than any they had yet tried; above all, he was so obstinate and
unrelenting an enemy, that, excepting the all-conquering mace of death,
it was certain that no obstacles born of man ever availed to turn him
aside from an object once resolved on. The reader will understand, of
course, that this enemy was Ali Pacha. Their ninth war was with him;
and he, like all before him, was beaten; but _not_ like all before
him did Ali sit down in resignation under his defeat. His hatred was
now become fiendish; no other prosperity or success had any grace in
his eyes, so long as Suli stood, by which he had been overthrown,
trampled on, and signally humbled. Life itself was odious to him, if he
must continue to witness the triumphant existence of the abhorred
little mountain village which had wrung laughter at his expense from
every nook of Epirus. _Delenda est Carthago! Suli must be
exterminated!_ became, therefore, from this time, the master
watchword of his secret policy. And on the 1st of June, in the year
1792, he commenced his second war against the Suliotes, at the head of
twenty-two thousand men. This was the second war of Suli with Ali
Pacha; but it was the tenth war on their annals; and, as far as their
own exertions were concerned, it had the same result as all the rest.
But, about the sixth year of the war, in an indirect way, Ali made one
step towards his final purpose, which first manifested its disastrous
tendency in the new circumstances which succeeding years brought
forward. In 1797 the French made a lodgment in Corfu; and, agreeably to
their general spirit of intrigue, they had made advances to Ali Pacha,
and to all other independent powers in or about Epirus. Amongst other
states, in an evil hour for that ill-fated city, they wormed themselves
into an alliance with Prevesa; and in the following year their own
quarrel with Ali Pacha gave that crafty robber a pretence, which he had
long courted in vain, for attacking the place with his overwhelming
cavalry, before they could agree upon the mode of defence, and long
before _any_ mode could have been tolerably matured. The result
was one universal massacre, which raged for three days, and involved
every living Prevesan, excepting some few who had wisely made their
escape in time, and excepting those who were reserved to be tortured
for Ali's special gratification, or to be sold for slaves in the
shambles. This dreadful catastrophe, which in a few hours rooted from
the earth an old and flourishing community, was due in about equal
degrees to the fatal intriguing of the interloping French, and to the
rankest treachery in a quarter where it could least have been held
possible; namely, in a Suliote, and a very distinguished Suliote,
Captain George Botzari; but the miserable man yielded up his honor and
his patriotism to Ali's bribe of one hundred purses (perhaps at that
time equal to twenty-five hundred pounds sterling). The way in which
this catastrophe operated upon Ali's final views was obvious to
everybody in that neighborhood. Parga, on the sea-coast, was an
indispensable ally to Suli; now, Prevesa stood in the same relation to
Parga, as an almost indispensable ally, that Parga occupied towards
Suli.

This shocking tragedy had been perpetrated in the October of 1798; and,
in less than two years from that date, namely, on the 2d of June, 1800,
commenced the eleventh war of the Suliotes; being their third with Ali,
and the last which, from their own guileless simplicity, meeting with
the craft of the most perfidious amongst princes, they were ever
destined to wage. For two years, that is, until the middle of 1802, the
war, as managed by the Suliotes, rather resembles a romance, or some
legend of the acts of Paladins, than any grave chapter in modern
history. Amongst the earliest victims it is satisfactory to mention the
traitor, George Botzari, who, being in the power of the Pacha, was
absolutely compelled to march with about two hundred of his kinsmen,
whom he had seduced from Suli, against his own countrymen, under whose
avenging swords the majority of them fell, whilst the arch-traitor
himself soon died of grief and mortification. After this, Ali himself
led a great and well-appointed army in various lines of assault against
Suli. But so furious was the reception given to the Turks, so deadly
and so uniform their defeat, that panic seized on the whole army, who
declared unanimously to Ali that they would no more attempt to contend
with the Suliotes--"Who," said they, "neither sit nor sleep, but are
born only for the destruction of men." Ali was actually obliged to
submit to this strange resolution of his army; but, by way of
compromise, he built a chain of forts pretty nearly encircling Suli;
and simply exacted of his troops that, being forever released from the
dangers of the open field, they should henceforward shut themselves up
in these forts, and constitute themselves a permanent blockading force
for the purpose of bridling the marauding excursions of the Suliotes.
It was hoped that, from the close succession of these forts, the
Suliotes would find it impossible to slip between the cross fires of
the Turkish musketry; and that, being thus absolutely cut off from
their common resources of plunder, they must at length be reduced by
mere starvation. That termination of the contest was in fact repeatedly
within a trifle of being accomplished; the poor Suliotes were reduced
to a diet of acorns; and even of this food had so slender a quantity
that many died, and the rest wore the appearance of blackened
skeletons. All this misery, however, had no effect to abate one jot of
their zeal and their undying hatred to the perfidious enemy who was
bending every sinew to their destruction. It is melancholy to record
that such perfect heroes, from whom force the most disproportioned, nor
misery the most absolute, had ever wrung the slightest concession or
advantage, were at length entrapped by the craft of their enemy; and by
their own foolish confidence in the oaths of one who had never been
known to keep any engagement which he had a momentary interest in
breaking. Ali contrived first of all to trepan the matchless leader of
the Suliotes, Captain Foto Giavella, who was a hero after the most
exquisite model of ancient Greece, Epaminondas, or Timoleon, and whose
counsels were uniformly wise and honest. After that loss, all harmony
of plan went to wreck amongst the Suliotes; and at length, about the
middle of December, 1803, this immortal little independent state of
Suli solemnly renounced by treaty to Ali Pacha its sacred territory,
its thrice famous little towns, and those unconquerable positions among
the crests of wooded inaccessible mountains which had baffled all the
armies of the crescent, led by the most eminent of the Ottoman Pachas,
and not seldom amounting to twenty, twenty-five, and in one instance
even to more than thirty thousand men. The articles of a treaty, which
on one side there never was an intention of executing, are scarcely
worth repeating; the amount was--that the Suliotes had perfect liberty
to go whither they chose, retaining the whole of their arms and
property, and with a title to payment in cash for every sort of warlike
store which could not be carried off. In excuse for the poor Suliotes
in trusting to treaties of any kind with an enemy whom no oaths could
bind for an hour, it is but fair to mention that they were now
absolutely without supplies either of ammunition or provisions; and
that, for seven days, they had suffered under a total deprivation of
water, the sources of which were now in the hands of the enemy, and
turned into new channels. The winding up of the memorable tale is soon
told:--the main body of the fighting Suliotes, agreeably to the
treaty, immediately took the route to Parga, where they were sure of a
hospitable reception, that city having all along made common cause with
Suli against their common enemy, Ali. The son of Ali, who had concluded
the treaty, and who inherited all his father's treachery, as fast as
possible despatched four thousand Turks in pursuit, with orders to
massacre the whole. But in this instance, through the gallant
assistance of the Parghiotes, and the energetic haste of the Suliotes,
the accursed wretch was disappointed of his prey. As to all the other
detachments of the Suliotes, who were scattered at different points,
and were necessarily thrown everywhere upon their own resources without
warning or preparation of any kind,--they, by the terms of the treaty,
had liberty to go away or to reside peaceably in any part of Ali's
dominions. But as these were mere windy words, it being well understood
that Ali's fixed intention was to cut every throat among the Suliotes,
whether of man, woman, or child,--nay, as he thought himself dismally
ill-used by every hour's delay which interfered with the execution of
that purpose,--what rational plan awaited the choice of the poor
Suliotes, finding themselves in the centre of a whole hostile nation,
and their own slender divisions cut off from communication with each
other? What could people so circumstanced propose to themselves as a
suitable resolution for their situation? Hope there was none; sublime
despair was all that their case allowed; and, considering the
unrivalled splendors of their past history for more than one hundred
and sixty years, perhaps most readers would reply, in the famous words
of Corneille--_Qu'ils mourussent_. That was their own reply to the
question now so imperatively forced upon them; and die they all did. It
is an argument of some great original nobility in the minds of these
poor people, that none disgraced themselves by useless submissions, and
that all alike, women as well as men, devoted themselves in the "high
Roman fashion" to the now expiring cause of their country. The first
case which occurred exhibits the very perfection of _nonchalance_
in circumstances the most appalling. Samuel, a Suliote monk, of
somewhat mixed and capricious character, and at times even liable to
much suspicion amongst his countrymen, but of great name, and of
unquestionable merit in his military character, was in the act of
delivering over to authorized Turkish agents a small outpost, which had
greatly annoyed the forces of Ali, together with such military stores
as it still contained. By the treaty, Samuel was perfectly free, and
under the solemn protection of Ali; but the Turks, with the utter
shamelessness to which they had been brought by daily familiarity with
treachery the most barefaced, were openly descanting to Samuel upon the
unheard-of tortures which must be looked for at the hands of Ali, by a
soldier who had given so much trouble to that Pacha as himself. Samuel
listened coolly; he was then seated on a chest of gunpowder, and powder
was scattered about in all directions. He watched in a careless way
until he observed that all the Turks, exulting in their own damnable
perfidies, were assembled under the roof of the building. He then
coolly took the burning snuff of a candle, and threw it into a heap of
combustibles, still keeping his seat upon the chest of powder. It is
unnecessary to add that the little fort, and all whom it contained,
were blown to atoms. And with respect to Samuel in particular, no
fragment of his skeleton could ever be discovered. After this followed as many separate tragedies as
there were separate parties of Suliotes; when all hope and all retreat
were clearly cut off, then the women led the great scene of self-
immolation, by throwing their children headlong from the summit of
precipices; which done, they and their husbands, their fathers and
their sons, hand in hand, ran up to the brink of the declivity, and
followed those whom they had sent before. In other situations, where
there was a possibility of fighting with effect, they made a long and
bloody resistance, until the Turkish cavalry, finding an opening for
their operations, made all further union impossible; upon which they
all plunged into the nearest river, without distinction of age or sex,
and were swallowed up by the merciful waters. Thus, in a few days, from
the signing of that treaty, which nominally secured to them peaceable
possession of their property, and paternal treatment from the
perfidious Pacha, none remained to claim his promises or to experience
his abominable cruelties. In their native mountains of Epirus, the name
of Suliote was now blotted from the books of life, and was heard no
more in those wild sylvan haunts, where once it had filled every echo
with the breath of panic to the quailing hearts of the Moslems. In the
most "palmy" days of Suli, she never had counted more than twenty-five
hundred fighting men; and of these no considerable body escaped,
excepting the corps who hastily fought their way to Parga. From that
city they gradually transported themselves to Corfu, then occupied by
the Russians. Into the service of the Russian Czar, as the sole means
left to a perishing corps of soldiers for earning daily bread, they
naturally entered; and when Corfu afterwards passed from Russian to
English masters, it was equally inevitable that for the same urgent
purposes they should enter the military service of England. In that
service they received the usual honorable treatment, and such attention
as circumstances would allow to their national habits and prejudices.
They were placed also, we believe, under the popular command of Sir R.
Church, who, though unfortunate as a supreme leader, made himself
beloved in a lower station by all the foreigners under his authority.
These Suliotes have since then returned to Epirus and to Greece, the
peace of 1815 having, perhaps, dissolved their connection with England,
and they were even persuaded to enter the service of their arch-enemy,
Ali Pacha. Since his death, their diminished numbers, and the altered
circumstances of their situation, should naturally have led to the
extinction of their political importance. Yet we find them in 1832
still attracting (or rather concentrating) the wrath of the Turkish
Sultan, made the object of a separate war, and valued (as in all former
cases) on the footing of a distinct and independent nation. On the
winding up of this war, we find part of them at least an object of
indulgent solicitude to the British government, and under their
protection transferred to Cephalonia. Yet again, others of their scanty
clan meet us at different points of the war in Greece; especially at
the first decisive action with Ibrahim, when, in the rescue of Costa
Botzaris, every Suliote of his blood perished on the spot; and again,
in the fatal battle of Athens (May 6, 1827), Mr. Gordon assures us that
"almost all the Suliotes were exterminated." We understand him to speak
not generally of the Suliotes, as of the total clan who bear that name,
but of those only who happened to be present at that dire catastrophe.
Still, even with this limitation, such a long succession of heavy
losses descending upon a people who never numbered above twenty-five
hundred fighting men, and who had passed through the furnace, seven
times heated, of Ali Pacha's wrath, and suffered those many and dismal
tragedies which we have just recorded, cannot but have brought them
latterly to the brink of utter extinction.

The winter of 1633 had set in with unusual severity throughout Suabia
and Bavaria, though as yet scarcely advanced beyond the first week of
November. It was, in fact, at the point when our tale commences, the
eighth of that month, or, in our modern computation, the eighteenth;
long after which date it had been customary of late years, under any
ordinary state of the weather, to extend the course of military
operations, and without much decline of vigor. Latterly, indeed, it had
become apparent that entire winter campaigns, without either formal
suspensions of hostilities, or even partial relaxations, had entered
professedly as a point of policy into the system of warfare which now
swept over Germany in full career, threatening soon to convert its vast
central provinces--so recently blooming Edens of peace and expanding
prosperity--into a howling wilderness; and which had already converted
immense tracts into one universal aceldama, or human shambles, reviving
to the recollection at every step the extent of past happiness in the
endless memorials of its destruction. This innovation upon the old
practice of war had been introduced by the Swedish armies, whose
northern habits and training had fortunately prepared them to receive a
German winter as a very beneficial exchange; whilst upon the less hardy
soldiers from Italy, Spain, and the Southern France, to whom the harsh
transition from their own sunny skies had made the very same climate a
severe trial of constitution, this change of policy pressed with a
hardship that sometimes crippled their
exertions.

It was a change, however, not so long settled as to resist the
extraordinary circumstances of the weather. So fierce had been the cold
for the last fortnight, and so premature, that a pretty confident
anticipation had arisen, in all quarters throughout the poor exhausted
land, of a general armistice. And as this, once established, would
offer a ready opening to some measure of permanent pacification, it
could not be surprising that the natural hopefulness of the human
heart, long oppressed by gloomy prospects, should open with unusual
readiness to the first colorable dawn of happier times. In fact, the
reaction in the public spirits was sudden and universal. It happened
also that the particular occasion of this change of prospect brought
with it a separate pleasure on its own account. Winter, which by its
peculiar severity had created the apparent necessity for an armistice,
brought many household pleasures in its train--associated immemorially
with that season in all northern climates. The cold, which had casually
opened a path to more distant hopes, was also for the present moment a
screen between themselves and the enemy's sword. And thus it happened
that the same season, which held out a not improbable picture of final
restoration, however remote, to public happiness, promised them a
certain foretaste of this blessing in the immediate security of their
homes.

But in the ancient city of Klosterheim it might have been imagined that
nobody participated in these feelings. A stir and agitation amongst the
citizens had been conspicuous for some days; and on the morning of the
eighth, spite of the intense cold, persons of every rank were seen
crowding from an early hour to the city walls, and returning homewards
at intervals, with anxious and dissatisfied looks. Groups of both sexes
were collected at every corner of the wider streets, keenly debating,
or angrily protesting; at one time denouncing vengeance to some great
enemy; at another, passionately lamenting some past or half-forgotten
calamity, recalled to their thoughts whilst anticipating a similar
catastrophe for the present day.

Above all, the great square, upon which the ancient castellated palace
or _schloss_ opened by one of its fronts, as well as a principal
convent of the city, was the resort of many turbulent spirits. Most of
these were young men, and amongst them many students of the university:
for the war, which had thinned or totally dispersed some of the
greatest universities in Germany, under the particular circumstances of
its situation, had greatly increased that of Klosterheim. Judging by
the tone which prevailed, and the random expressions which fell upon
the ear at intervals, a stranger might conjecture that it was no empty
lamentation over impending evils which occupied this crowd, but some
serious preparation for meeting or redressing them. An officer of some
distinction had been for some time observing them from the antique
portals of the palace. It was probable, however, that little more than
their gestures had reached him; for at length he moved nearer, and
gradually insinuated himself into the thickest part of the mob, with
the air of one who took no further concern in their proceedings than
that of simple curiosity. But his martial air and his dress allowed him
no means of covering his purpose. With more warning and leisure to
arrange his precautions, he might have passed as an indifferent
spectator; as it was, his jewel-hilted sabre, the massy gold chain,
depending in front from a costly button and loop which secured it half
way down his back, and his broad crimson scarf, embroidered in a style
of peculiar splendor, announced him as a favored officer of the
Landgrave, whose ambitious pretensions, and tyrannical mode of
supporting them, were just now the objects of general abhorrence in
Klosterheim. His own appearance did not belie the service which he had
adopted. He was a man of stout person, somewhat elegantly formed, in
age about three or four and thirty, though perhaps a year or two of his
apparent age might be charged upon the bronzing effects of sun and
wind. In bearing and carriage he announced to every eye the mixed
carelessness and self-possession of a military training; and as his
features were regular, and remarkably intelligent, he would have been
pronounced, on the whole, a man of winning exterior, were it not for
the repulsive effect of his eye, in which there was a sinister
expression of treachery, and at times a ferocious one of cruelty.

Placed upon their guard by his costume, and the severity of his
countenance, those of the lower rank were silent as he moved along, or
lowered their voices into whispers and inaudible murmurs. Amongst the
students, however, whenever they happened to muster strongly, were many
fiery young men, who disdained to temper the expression of their
feelings, or to moderate their tone. A large group of these at one
corner of the square drew attention upon themselves, as well by the
conspicuous station which they occupied upon the steps of a church
portico, as by the loudness of their voices. Towards them the officer
directed his steps; and probably no lover of _scenes_ would have
had very long to wait for some explosion between parties both equally
ready to take offence, and careless of giving it; but at that moment,
from an opposite angle of the square, was seen approaching a young man
in plain clothes, who drew off the universal regard of the mob upon
himself, and by the uproar of welcome which saluted him occasioned all
other sounds to be stifled. "Long life to our noble leader!"--"Welcome
to the good Max!" resounded through the square. "Hail to our noble
brother!" was the acclamation of the students. And everybody hastened
forward to meet him with an impetuosity which for the moment drew off
all attention from the officer: he was left standing by himself on the
steps of the church, looking down upon this scene of joyous welcome--
the sole spectator who neither fully understood its meaning, nor shared
in its feelings.

The stranger, who wore in part the antique costume of the university of
Klosterheim, except where he still retained underneath a travelling
dress, stained with recent marks of the roads and the weather, advanced
amongst his friends with an air at once frank, kind, and dignified. He
replied to their greetings in the language of cheerfulness; but his
features expressed anxiety, and his manner was hurried. Whether he had
not observed the officer overlooking them, or thought that the
importance of the communications which he had to make transcended all
common restraints of caution, there was little time to judge; so it
was, at any rate, that, without lowering his voice, he entered abruptly
upon his business.

"Friends! I have seen the accursed Holkerstein; I have penetrated
within his fortress. With my own eyes I have viewed and numbered his
vile assassins. They are in strength triple the utmost amount of our
friends. Without help from us, our kinsmen are lost. Scarce one of us
but will lose a dear friend before three nights are over, should
Klosterheim not resolutely do her duty."

Waldenhausen had formerly been a considerable village. At present there
was no more than one house, surrounded, however, by such a large
establishment of barns, stables, and other outhouses, that, at a little
distance, it wore the appearance of a tolerable hamlet. Most of the
outhouses, in their upper stories, were filled with hay or straw; and
there the women and children prepared their couches for the night, as
the warmest resorts in so severe a season. The house was furnished in
the plainest style of a farmer's; but in other respects it was of a
superior order, being roomy and extensive. The best apartment had been
reserved for the Lady Paulina and her attendants; one for the officers
of most distinction in the escort or amongst the travellers; the rest
had been left to the use of the travellers indiscriminately.

In passing through the hall of entrance, Paulina had noticed a man of
striking and _farouche_ appearance,--hair black and matted, eyes
keen and wild, and beaming with malicious cunning, who surveyed her as
she passed with a mixed look of insolence and curiosity, that
involuntarily made her shrink. He had been half reclining carelessly
against the wall, when she first entered, but rose upright with a
sudden motion as she passed him--not probably from any sentiment of
respect, but under the first powerful impression of surprise on seeing
a young woman of peculiarly splendid figure and impressive beauty,
under circumstances so little according with what might be supposed her
natural pretensions. The dignity of her deportment, and the numbers of
her attendants, sufficiently proclaimed the luxurious accommodations
which her habits might have taught her to expect; and she was now
entering a dwelling which of late years had received few strangers of
her sex, and probably none but those of the lowest rank.

"Know your distance, fellow!" exclaimed one of the waiting-women,
angrily, noticing his rude gaze and the effect upon her mistress.

"Good faith, madam, I would that the distance between us were more; it
was no prayers of mine, I promise you, that brought upon me a troop of
horses to Waldenhausen, enough in one twelve hours to eat me out a
margrave's ransom. Light thanks I reckon on from yagers; and the
payments of dragoons will pass current for as little in the forest, as
a lady's frown in Waldenhausen."

"Churl!" said an officer of dragoons, "how know you that our payments
are light? The emperor takes nothing without payment; surely not from
such as you. But _ŕ propos_ of ransoms, what now might be Holkerstein's
ransom for a farmer's barns stuffed with a three years' crop?"

"How mean you by that, captain? The crop's my own, and never was in
worse hands than my own. God send it no worse luck to-day!"

"Come, come, sir, you understand me better than that; nothing at
Waldenhausen, I take it, is yours or any man's, unless by license from
Holkerstein. And when I see so many goodly barns and garners, with
their jolly charges of hay and corn, that would feed one of
Holkerstein's garrisons through two sieges, I know what to think of him
who has saved them scot-free. He that serves a robber must do it on a
robber's terms. To such bargains there goes but one word, and that is
the robber's. But, come, man, I am not thy judge. Only I would have my
soldiers on their guard at one of Holkerstein's outposts. And thee,
farmer, I would have to remember that an emperor's grace may yet stand
thee instead, when a robber is past helping thee to a rope."

The soldiers laughed, but took their officer's hint to watch the
motions of a man, whose immunity from spoil, in circumstances so
tempting to a military robber's cupidity, certainly argued some
collusion with Holkerstein.

The Lady Paulina had passed on during this dialogue into an inner room,
hoping to have found the quiet and the warmth which were now become so
needful to her repose. But the antique stove was too much out of repair
to be used with benefit; the wood-work was decayed, and admitted
currents of cold air; and, above all, from the slightness of the
partitions, the noise and tumult in a house occupied by soldiers and
travellers proved so incessant, that, after taking refreshments with
her attendants, she resolved to adjourn for the night to her coach;
which afforded much superior resources, both in warmth and in freedom
from noise.

The carriage of the countess was one of those which had been posted at
an angle of the encampment, and on that side terminated the line of
defences; for a deep mass of wood, which commenced where the carriages
ceased, seemed to present a natural protection on that side against the
approach of cavalry; in reality, from the quantity of tangled roots,
and the inequalities of the ground, it appeared difficult for a single
horseman to advance even a few yards without falling. And upon this
side it had been judged sufficient to post a single sentinel.

Assured by the many precautions adopted, and by the cheerful language
of the officer on guard, who attended her to the carriage door,
Paulina, with one attendant, took her seat in the coach, where she had
the means of fencing herself sufficiently from the cold by the weighty
robes of minever and ermine which her ample wardrobe afforded; and the
large dimensions of the coach enabled her to turn it to the use of a
sofa or couch.

Youth and health sleep well; and with all the means and appliances of
the Lady Paulina, wearied besides as she had been with the fatigue of a
day's march, performed over roads almost impassable from roughness,
there was little reason to think that she would miss the benefit of her
natural advantages. Yet sleep failed to come, or came only by fugitive
snatches, which presented her with tumultuous dreams,--sometimes of the
emperor's court in Vienna, sometimes of the vast succession of troubled
scenes and fierce faces that had passed before her since she had
quitted that city. At one moment she beheld the travelling equipages
and far-stretching array of her own party, with their military escort
filing off by torchlight under the gateway of ancient cities; at
another, the ruined villages, with their dismantled cottages,--doors
and windows torn off, walls scorched with fire, and a few gaunt dogs,
with a wolf-like ferocity in their bloodshot eyes, prowling about the
ruins,--objects that had really so often afflicted her heart. Waking
from those distressing spectacles, she would fall into a fitful doze,
which presented her with remembrances still more alarming: bands of
fierce deserters, that eyed her travelling party with a savage rapacity
which did not confess any powerful sense of inferiority; and in the
very fields which they had once cultivated, now silent and tranquil
from utter desolation, the mouldering bodies of the unoffending
peasants, left un-honored with the rites of sepulture, in many places
from the mere extermination of the whole rural population of their
neighborhood. To these succeeded a wild chaos of figures, in which the
dress and tawny features of Bohemian gypsies conspicuously prevailed,
just as she had seen them of late making war on all parties alike; and,
in the person of their leader, her fancy suddenly restored to her a
vivid resemblance of their suspicious host at their present quarters,
and of the malicious gaze with which he had disconcerted her.

A sudden movement of the carriage awakened her, and, by the light of a
lamp suspended from a projecting bough of a tree, she beheld, on
looking out, the sallow countenance of the very man whose image had so
recently infested her dreams. The light being considerably nearer to
him than to herself, she could see without being distinctly seen; and,
having already heard the very strong presumptions against this man's
honesty which had been urged by the officer, and without reply from the
suspected party, she now determined to watch him.


CHAPTER III.


The night was pitch dark, and Paulina felt a momentary terror creep
over her as she looked into the massy blackness of the dark alleys
which ran up into the woods, forced into deeper shade under the glare
of the lamps from the encampment. She now reflected with some alarm
that the forest commenced at this point, stretching away (as she had
been told) in some directions upwards of fifty miles; and that, if the
post occupied by their encampment should be inaccessible on this side
to cavalry, it might, however, happen that persons with the worst
designs could easily penetrate on foot from the concealments of the
forest; in which case she herself, and the splendid booty of her
carriage, might be the first and easiest prey. Even at this moment, the
very worst of those atrocious wretches whom the times had produced
might be lurking in concealment, with their eyes fastened upon the weak
or exposed parts of the encampment, and waiting until midnight should
have buried the majority of their wearied party into the profoundest
repose, in order then to make a combined and murderous attack. Under
the advantages of sudden surprise and darkness, together with the
knowledge which they would not fail to possess of every road and by-
path in the woods, it could scarcely be doubted that they might strike
a very effectual blow at the Vienna caravan, which had else so nearly
completed their journey without loss or memorable privations;--and the
knowledge which Holkerstein possessed of the short limits within which
his opportunities were now circumscribed would doubtless prompt him to
some bold and energetic effort.

Thoughts unwelcome as these Paulina found leisure to pursue; for the
ruffian landlord had disappeared almost at the same moment when she
first caught a glimpse of him. In the deep silence which succeeded, she
could not wean herself from the painful fascination of imagining the
very worst possibilities to which their present situation was liable.
She imaged to herself the horrors of a _camisade_, as she had
often heard it described; she saw, in apprehension, the savage band of
confederate butchers, issuing from the profound solitudes of the
forest, in white shirts drawn over their armor; she seemed to read the
murderous features, lighted up by the gleam of lamps--the stealthy
step, and the sudden gleam of sabres; then the yell of assault, the
scream of agony, the camp floating with blood; the fury, the vengeance,
the pursuit;--all these circumstances of scenes at that time too
familiar to Germany passed rapidly before her mind.

But after some time, as the tranquillity continued, her nervous
irritation gave way to less agitating but profound sensibilities.
Whither was her lover withdrawn from her knowledge? and why? and for
how long a time? What an age it seemed since she had last seen him at
Vienna! That the service upon which he was employed would prove
honorable, she felt assured. But was it dangerous? Alas! in Germany
there was none otherwise. Would it soon restore him to her society? And
why had he been of late so unaccountably silent? Or again, _had_
he been silent? Perhaps his letters had been intercepted,--nothing, in
fact, was more common at that time. The rarity was, if by any accident
a letter reached its destination. From one of the worst solicitudes
incident to such a situation Paulina was, however, delivered by her own
nobility of mind, which raised her above the meanness of jealousy.
Whatsoever might have happened, or into whatever situations her lover
might have been thrown, she felt no fear that the fidelity of his
attachment could have wandered or faltered for a moment; that worst of
pangs the Lady Paulina was raised above, equally by her just confidence
in herself and in her lover. But yet, though faithful to her, might he
not be ill? Might he not be languishing in some one of the many
distresses incident to war? Might he not even have perished?

That fear threw her back upon the calamities and horrors of war; and
insensibly her thoughts wandered round to the point from which they had
started, of her own immediate situation. Again she searched with
penetrating eyes the black avenues of the wood, as they lay forced
almost into strong relief and palpable substance by the glare of the
lamps. Again she fancied to herself the murderous hearts and glaring
eyes which even now might be shrouded by the silent masses of forest
which stretched before her,--when suddenly a single light shot its rays
from what appeared to be a considerable distance in one of the avenues.
Paulina's heart beat fast at this alarming spectacle. Immediately
after, the light was shaded, or in some way disappeared. But this gave
the more reason for terror. It was now clear that human beings were
moving in the woods. No public road lay in that direction; nor, in so
unpopulous a region, could it be imagined that travellers were likely
at that time to be abroad. From their own encampment nobody could have
any motive for straying to a distance on so severe a night, and at a
time when he would reasonably draw upon himself the danger of being
shot by the night-guard.

This last consideration reminded Paulina suddenly, as of a very
singular circumstance, that the appearance of the light had been
followed by no challenge from the sentinel. And then first she
remembered that for some time she had ceased to hear the sentinel's
step, or the rattle of his bandoleers. Hastily looking along the path,
she discovered too certainly that the single sentinel posted on that
side of their encampment was absent from his station. It might have
been supposed that he had fallen asleep from the severity of the cold;
but in that case the lantern which he carried attached to his breast
would have continued to burn; whereas all traces of light had vanished
from the path which he perambulated. The error was now apparent to
Paulina, both in having appointed no more than one sentinel to this
quarter, and also in the selection of his beat. There had been frequent
instances throughout this war in which by means of a net, such as that
carried by the Roman _retiarius_ in the contests of the gladiators,
and dexterously applied by two persons from behind, a sentinel
had been suddenly muffled, gagged, and carried off, without much
difficulty. For such a purpose it was clear that the present
sentinel's range, lying by the margin of a wood from which his minutest
movements could be watched at leisure by those who lay in utter
darkness themselves, afforded every possible facility. Paulina scarcely
doubted that he had been indeed carried off, in some such way, and not
impossibly almost whilst she was looking on.

She would now have called aloud, and have alarmed the camp; but at the
very moment when she let down the glass the savage landlord reappeared,
and, menacing her with a pistol, awed her into silence. He bore upon
his head a moderate-sized trunk, or portmanteau, which appeared, by the
imperfect light, to be that in which some despatches had been lodged
from the imperial government to different persons in Klosterheim. This
had been cut from one of the carriages in her suite; and her anxiety
was great on recollecting that, from some words of the emperor's, she
had reason to believe one, at least, of the letters which it conveyed
to be in some important degree connected with the interests of her
lover. Satisfied, however, that he would not find it possible to
abscond with so burdensome an article in any direction that could save
him from instant pursuit and arrest, she continued to watch for the
moment when she might safely raise the alarm. But great was her
consternation when she saw a dark figure steal from a thicket, receive
the trunk from the other, and instantly retreat into the deepest
recesses of the forest.

Her fears now gave way to the imminence of so important a loss; and she
endeavored hastily to open the window of the opposite door. But this
had been so effectually barricaded against the cold, that she failed in
her purpose, and, immediately turning back to the other side, she
called, loudly,--"Guard! guard!" The press of carriages, however, at
this point, so far deadened her voice, that it was some time before the
alarm reached the other side of the encampment distinctly enough to
direct their motions to her summons. Half a dozen yagers and an officer
at length presented themselves; but the landlord had disappeared, she
knew not in what direction. Upon explaining the circumstances of the
robbery, however, the officer caused his men to light a number of
torches, and advance into the wood. But the ground was so impracticable
in most places, from tangled roots and gnarled stumps of trees, that it
was with difficulty they could keep their footing. They were also
embarrassed by the crossing shadows From the innumerable boughs above
them; and a situation of greater perplexity for effective pursuit it
was scarcely possible to imagine. Everywhere they saw alleys, arched
high overhead, and resembling the aisles of a cathedral, as much in
form as in the perfect darkness which reigned in both at this solemn
hour of midnight, stretching away apparently without end, but more and
more obscure, until impenetrable blackness terminated the long vista.
Now and then a dusky figure was seen to cross at some distance; but
these were probably deer; and when loudly challenged by the yagers, no
sound replied but the vast echoes of the forest. Between these
interminable alleys, which radiated as from a centre at this point,
there were generally thickets interposed. Sometimes the wood was more
open, and clear of all undergrowth--shrubs, thorns, or brambles--for a
considerable distance, so that a single file of horsemen might have
penetrated for perhaps half a mile; but belts of thicket continually
checked their progress, and obliged them to seek their way back to some
one of the long vistas which traversed the woods between the frontiers
of Suabia and Bavaria.

In this perplexity of paths, the officer halted his party to consider
of his further course. At this moment one of the yagers protested that
he had seen a man's hat and face rise above a thicket of bushes,
apparently not more than a hundred and fifty yards from their own
position. Upon that the party were ordered to advance a little, and to
throw in a volley, as nearly as could be judged, into the very spot
pointed out by the soldier. It seemed that he had not been mistaken;
for a loud laugh of derision rose immediately a little to the left of
the bushes. The laughter swelled upon the silence of the night, and in
the next moment was taken up by another on the right, which again was
echoed by a third on the rear. Peal after peal of tumultuous and
scornful laughter resounded from the remoter solitudes of the forest;
and the officer stood aghast to hear this proclamation of defiance from
a multitude of enemies, where he had anticipated no more than the very
party engaged in the robbery.

To advance in pursuit seemed now both useless and dangerous. The
laughter had probably been designed expressly to distract his choice of
road at a time when the darkness and intricacies of the ground had
already made it sufficiently indeterminate. In which direction, out of
so many whence he had heard the sounds, a pursuit could be instituted
with any chance of being effectual, seemed now as hopeless a subject of
deliberation as it was possible to imagine. Still, as he had been made
aware of the great importance attached to the trunk, which might very
probably contain despatches interesting to the welfare of Klosterheim,
and the whole surrounding territory, he felt grieved to retire without
some further attempt for its recovery. And he stood for a few moments
irresolutely debating with himself, or listening to the opinions of his
men.

His irresolution was very abruptly terminated. All at once, upon the
main road from Klosterheim, at an angle about half a mile ahead where
it first wheeled into sight from Waldenhausen, a heavy thundering trot
was heard ringing from the frozen road, as of a regular body of cavalry
advancing rapidly upon their encampment. There was no time to be lost;
the officer instantly withdrew his yagers from the wood, posted a
strong guard at the wood side, sounded the alarm throughout the camp,
agreeably to the system of signals previously concerted, mounted about
thirty men, whose horses and themselves were kept in perfect equipment
during each of the night-watches, and then advancing to the head of the
barriers, prepared to receive the party of strangers in whatever
character they should happen to present themselves.

All this had been done with so much promptitude and decision, that, on
reaching the barriers, the officer found the strangers not yet come up.
In fact, they had halted at a strong outpost about a quarter of a mile
in advance of Waldenhausen; and though one or two patrollers came
dropping in from by-roads on the forest-heath, who reported them as
enemies, from the indistinct view they had caught of their equipments,
it had already become doubtful from their movements whether they would
really prove so.

Two of their party were now descried upon the road, and nearly close up
with the gates of Waldenhausen; they were accompanied by several of the
guard from the outpost; and, immediately on being hailed, they
exclaimed, "Friends, and from Klosterheim!"

He who spoke was a young cavalier, magnificent alike in his person,
dress, and style of his appointments. He was superbly mounted, wore the
decorations of a major-general in the imperial service, and scarcely
needed the explanations which he gave to exonerate himself from the
suspicion of being a leader of robbers under Holkerstein. Fortunately
enough, also, at a period when officers of the most distinguished merit
were too often unfaithful to their engagements, or passed with so much
levity from service to service as to justify an indiscriminate jealousy
of all who were not in the public eye, it happened that the officer of
the watch, formerly, when mounting guard at the imperial palace, had
been familiar with the personal appearance of the cavalier, and could
speak of his own knowledge to the favor which he had enjoyed at the
emperor's court. After short explanations, therefore, he was admitted,
and thankfully welcomed in the camp; and the officer of the guard
departed to receive with honor the generous volunteers at the outpost.

Meantime, the alarm, which was general throughout the camp, had
assembled all the women to one quarter, where a circle of carriages had
been formed for their protection. In their centre, distinguished by her
height and beauty, stood the Lady Paulina, dispensing assistance from
her wardrobe to any who were suffering from cold under this sudden
summons to night air, and animating others, who were more than usually
depressed, by the aids of consolation and of cheerful prospects. She
had just turned her face away from the passage by which this little
sanctuary communicated with the rest of the camp, and was in the act of
giving directions to one of her attendants, when suddenly a well-known
voice fell upon her ear. It was the voice of the stranger cavalier,
whose natural gallantry had prompted him immediately to relieve the
alarm, which, unavoidably, he had himself created; in a few words, he
was explaining to the assembled females of the camp in what character,
and with how many companions, he had come. But a shriek from Paulina
interrupted him. Involuntarily she held out her open arms, and
involuntarily she exclaimed, "Dearest Maximilian!" On his part, the
young cavalier, for a moment or two at first, was almost deprived of
speech by astonishment and excess of pleasure. Bounding forward, hardly
conscious of those who surrounded them, with a rapture of faithful love
he caught the noble young beauty into his arms,--a movement to which,
in the frank innocence of her heart, she made no resistance; folded her
to his bosom, and impressed a fervent kiss upon her lips; whilst the
only words that came to his own were, "Beloved Paulina! 0, most beloved
lady! what chance has brought you hither?"


CHAPTER IV.


In those days of tragical confusion, and of sudden catastrophe, alike
for better or for worse,--when the rendings asunder of domestic
charities were often without an hour's warning, when reunions were as
dramatic and as unexpected as any which are exhibited on the stage, and
too often separations were eternal,--the circumstances of the times
concurred with the spirit of manners to sanction a tone of frank
expression to the stronger passions, which the reserve of modern habits
would not entirely license. And hence, not less than from the noble
ingenuousness of their natures, the martial young cavalier, and the
superb young beauty of the imperial house, on recovering themselves
from their first transports, found no motives to any feeling of false
shame, either in their own consciousness, or in the reproving looks of
any who stood around them. On the contrary, as the grown-up spectators
were almost exclusively female, to whom the evidences of faithful love
are never other than a serious subject, or naturally associated with
the ludicrous, many of them expressed their sympathy with the scene
before them by tears, and all of them in some way or other. Even in
this age of more fastidious manners, it is probable that the tender
interchanges of affection between a young couple rejoining each other
after deep calamities, and standing on the brink of fresh, perhaps
endless separations, would meet with something of the same indulgence
from the least interested witnesses.

Hence the news was diffused through the camp with general satisfaction,
that a noble and accomplished cavalier, the favored lover of their
beloved young mistress, had joined them from Klosterheim, with a chosen
band of volunteers, upon whose fidelity in action they might entirely
depend. Some vague account floated about, at the same time, of the
marauding attack upon the Lady Paulina's carriage. But naturally
enough, from the confusion and hurry incident to a nocturnal
disturbance, the circumstances were mixed up with the arrival of
Maximilian, in a way which ascribed to him the merit of having repelled
an attack, which might else have proved fatal to the lady of his heart.
And this romantic interposition of Providence on a young lady's behalf,
through the agency of her lover, unexpected on her part, and
unconscious on his, proved so equally gratifying to the passion for the
marvellous and the interest in youthful love, that no other or truer
version of the case could ever obtain a popular acceptance in the camp,
or afterwards in Klosterheim. And had it been the express purpose of
Maximilian to found a belief, for his own future benefit, of a
providential sanction vouchsafed to his connection with the Lady
Paulina, he could not, by the best-arranged contrivances, have more
fully attained that end.

It was yet short of midnight by more than an hour; and therefore, on
the suggestion of Maximilian, who reported the roads across the forest
perfectly quiet, and alleged some arguments for quieting the general
apprehension for this night, the travellers and troops retired to rest,
as the best means of preparing them to face the trials of the two next
days. It was judged requisite, however, to strengthen the night-guard
very considerably, and to relieve it at least every two hours. That the
poor sentinel on the forest side of the encampment had been in some
mysterious way trepanned upon his post, was now too clearly
ascertained, for he was missing; and the character of the man, no less
than the absence of all intelligible temptation to such an act, forbade
the suspicion of his having deserted. On this quarter, therefore, a
file of select marksmen were stationed, with directions instantly to
pick off every moving figure that showed itself within their range. Of
these men Maximilian himself took the command; and by this means he
obtained the opportunity, so enviable to one long separated from his
mistress, of occasionally conversing with her, and of watching over her
safety. In one point he showed a distinguished control over his
inclinations; for, much as he had to tell her, and ardently as he
longed for communicating with her on various subjects of common
interest, he would not suffer her to keep the window down for more than
a minute or two in so dreadful a state of the atmosphere. She, on her
part, exacted a promise from him that he would leave his station at
three o'clock in the morning. Meantime, as on the one hand she felt
touched by this proof of her lover's solicitude for her safety, so, on
the other, she was less anxious on his account, from the knowledge she
had of his long habituation to the hardships of a camp, with which,
indeed, he had been familiar from his childish days. Thus debarred from
conversing with her lover, and at the same time feeling the most
absolute confidence in his protection, she soon fell placidly asleep.
The foremost subject of her anxiety and sorrow was now removed; her
lover had been restored to her hopes; and her dreams were no longer
haunted with horrors. Yet, at the same time, the turbulence of joy and
of hope fulfilled unexpectedly had substituted its own disturbances;
and her sleep was often interrupted. But, as often as that happened,
she had the delightful pleasure of seeing her lover's figure, with its
martial equipments, and the drooping plumes of his yager barrette, as
he took his station at her carriage, traced out on the ground in the
bright glare of the flambeaux. She awoke, therefore, continually to the
sense of restored happiness; and at length fell finally asleep, to wake
no more until the morning trumpet, at the break of day, proclaimed the
approaching preparations for the general movement of the camp.

Snow had fallen in the night. Towards four o'clock in the morning,
amongst those who held that watch there had been a strong apprehension
that it would fall heavily. But that state of the atmosphere had passed
off; and it had not in fact fallen sufficiently to abate the cold, or
much to retard their march. According to the usual custom of the camp,
a general breakfast was prepared, at which all, without distinction,
messed together--a sufficient homage being expressed to superior rank
by resigning the upper part of every table to those who had any
distinguished pretensions of that kind. On this occasion Paulina had
the gratification of seeing the public respect offered in the most
marked manner to her lover. He had retired about daybreak to take an
hour's repose,--for she found, from her attendants, with mingled
vexation and pleasure, that he had not fulfilled his promise of
retiring at an earlier hour, in consequence of some renewed appearances
of a suspicious kind in the woods. In his absence, she heard a
resolution proposed and carried, amongst the whole body of veteran
officers attached to the party, that the chief military command should
be transferred to Maximilian, not merely as a distinguished favorite of
the emperor, but also, and much more, as one of the most brilliant
cavalry officers in the imperial service. This resolution was
communicated to him on his taking the place reserved for him, at the
head of the principal breakfast-table; and Paulina thought that he had
never appeared more interesting, or truly worthy of admiration, than
under that exhibition of courtesy and modest dignity with which he
first earnestly declined the honor in favor of older officers, and then
finally complied with what he found to be the sincere wish of the
company, by frankly accepting it. Paulina had grown up amongst military
men, and had been early trained to a sympathy with military merit,--the
very court of the emperor had something of the complexion of a camp,--
and the object of her own youthful choice was elevated in her eyes, if
it were at all possible that he should be so, by this ratification of
his claims on the part of those whom she looked up to as the most
competent judges.

Before nine o'clock the van of the party was in motion; then, with a
short interval, came all the carriages of every description, and the
Papenheim dragoons as a rear-guard. About eleven the sun began to burst
out, and illuminated, with the cheerful crimson of a frosty morning,
those horizontal draperies of mist which had previously stifled his
beams. The extremity of the cold was a good deal abated by this time,
and Paulina, alighting from her carriage, mounted a led horse, which
gave her the opportunity, so much wished for by them both, of
conversing freely with Maximilian. For a long time the interest and
animation of their reciprocal communications, and the magnitude of the
events since they had parted, affecting either or both of them
directly, or in the persons of their friends, had the natural effect of
banishing any dejection which nearer and more pressing concerns would
else have called forth. But, in the midst of this factitious animation,
and the happiness which otherwise so undisguisedly possessed Maximilian
at their unexpected reunion, it shocked Paulina to observe in her lover
a degree of gravity almost amounting to sadness, which argued in a
soldier of his gallantry some overpowering sense of danger. In fact,
upon being pressed to say the worst, Maximilian frankly avowed that he
was ill at ease with regard to their prospects when the hour of trial
should arrive; and that hour he had no hope of evading. Holkerstein, he
well knew, had been continually receiving reports of their condition,
as they reached their nightly stations, for the last three days. Spies
had been round about them, and even in the midst of them, throughout
the darkness of the last night. Spies were keeping pace with them as
they advanced. The certainty of being attacked was therefore pretty
nearly absolute. Then, as to their means of defence, and the relations
of strength between the parties, in numbers it was not impossible that
Holkerstein might triple themselves. The elite of their own men might
be superior to most of his, though counting amongst their number many
deserters from veteran regiments; but the horses of their own party
were in general poor and out of condition,--and of the whole train,
whom Maximilian had inspected at starting, not two hundred could be
pronounced fit for making or sustaining a charge. It was true that by
mounting some of their picked troopers upon the superior horses of the
most distinguished amongst the travellers, who had willingly consented
to an arrangement of this nature for the general benefit, some partial
remedy had been applied to their weakness in that one particular. But
there were others in which Holkerstein had even greater advantages;
more especially, the equipments of his partisans were entirely new,
having been plundered from an ill-guarded armory near Munich, or from
convoys which he had attacked. "Who would be a gentleman," says an old
proverb, "let him storm a town;" and the gay appearance of this
robber's companions threw a light upon its meaning. The ruffian
companions of this marauder were, besides, animated by hopes such as no
regular commander in an honorable service could find the means of
holding out. And, finally, they were familiar with all the forest roads
and innumerable bypaths, on which it was that the best points lay for
surprising an enemy, or for a retreat; whilst, in their own case,
encumbered with the protection of a large body of travellers and
helpless people, whom, under any circumstances, it was hazardous to
leave, they were tied up to the most slavish dependency upon the
weakness of their companions; and had it not in their power either to
evade the most evident advantages on the side of the enemy, or to
pursue such as they might be fortunate enough to create for themselves.

"But, after all." said Maximilian, assuming a tone of gayety, upon
finding that the candor of his explanations had depressed his fair
companion, "the saying of an old Swedish enemy of mine is worth remembering in such cases,--that,
nine times out of ten, a drachm of good luck is worth an ounce of good
contrivance,--and were it not, dearest Paulina, that you are with us, I
would think the risk not heavy. Perhaps, by to-morrow's sunset, we
shall all look back from our pleasant seats in the warm refectories of
Klosterheim, with something of scorn, upon our present apprehensions.--
And see! at this very moment the turn of the road has brought us in
view of our port, though distant from us, according to the windings of
the forest, something more than twenty miles. That range of hills,
which you observe ahead, but a little inclined to the left, overhangs
Klosterheim; and, with the sun in a more favorable quarter, you might
even at this point descry the pinnacles of the citadel, or the loftiest
of the convent towers. Half an hour will bring us to the close of our
day's march."

In reality, a few minutes sufficed to bring them within view of the
chateau where their quarters had been prepared for this night. This was
a great hunting establishment, kept up at vast expense by the two last
and present Landgraves of X----. Many interesting anecdotes were
connected with the history of this building; and the beauty of the
forest scenery was conspicuous even in winter, enlivened as the endless
woods continued to be by the scarlet berries of mountain-ash, or the
dark verdure of the holly and the ilex. Under her present frame of
pensive feeling, the quiet lawns and long-withdrawing glades of these
vast woods had a touching effect upon the feelings of Paulina; their
deep silence, and the tranquillity which reigned amongst them,
contrasting in her remembrance with the hideous scenes of carnage and
desolation through which her path had too often lain. With these
predisposing influences to aid him, Maximilian found it easy to draw
off her attention from the dangers which pressed upon their situation.
Her sympathies were so quick with those whom she loved, that she
readily adopted their apparent hopes or their fears; and so entire was
her confidence in the superior judgment and the perfect gallantry of
her lover, that her countenance reflected immediately the prevailing
expression of his.

Under these impressions Maximilian suffered her to remain. It seemed
cruel to disturb her with the truth. He was sensible that continued
anxiety, and dreadful or afflicting spectacles, had with her, as with
most persons of her sex in Germany at that time, unless protected by
singular insensibility, somewhat impaired the firm tone of her mind. He
was determined, therefore, to consult her comfort, by disguising or
palliating their true situation. But, for his own part, he could not
hide from his conviction the extremity of their danger; nor could he,
when recurring to the precious interests at stake upon the issue of
that and the next day's trials, face with any firmness the afflicting
results to which they tended, under the known barbarity and ruffian
character of their unprincipled enemy.


CHAPTER V.


The chateau of Falkenberg, which the travellers reached with the
decline of light, had the usual dependences of offices and gardens,
which may be supposed essential to a prince's hunting establishment in
that period. It stood at a distance of eighteen miles from Klosterheim,
and presented the sole _oasis_ of culture and artificial beauty
throughout the vast extent of those wild tracts of sylvan ground.

The great central pile of the building was dismantled of furniture; but
the travellers carried with them, as was usual in the heat of war, all
the means of fencing against the cold, and giving even a luxurious
equipment to their dormitories. In so large a party, the deficiencies
of one were compensated by the redundant contributions of another. And
so long as they were not under the old Roman interdict, excluding them
from seeking fire and water of those on whom their day's journey had
thrown them, their own travelling stores enabled them to accommodate
themselves to all other privations. On this occasion, however, they
found more than they had expected; for there was at Falkenberg a store
of all the game in season, constantly kept up for the use of the
Landgrave's household, and the more favored monasteries at Klosterheim.
The small establishment of keepers, foresters, and other servants, who
occupied the chateau, had received no orders to refuse the hospitality
usually practised in the Landgrave's name; or thought proper to
dissemble them in their present circumstances of inability to resist.
And having from necessity permitted so much, they were led by a sense
of their master's honor, or their own sympathy with the condition of so
many women and children, to do more. Rations of game were distributed
liberally to all the messes; wine was not refused by the old
_kellermeister_, who rightly considered that some thanks, and
smiles of courteous acknowledgment, might be a better payment than the
hard knocks with which military paymasters were sometimes apt to settle
their accounts. And, upon the whole, it was agreed that no such evening
of comfort, and even luxurious enjoyment, had been spent since their
departure from Vienna.

One wing of the chateau was magnificently furnished. This, which of
itself was tolerably extensive, had been resigned to the use of
Paulina, Maximilian, and others of the military gentlemen, whose
manners and deportment seemed to entitle them to superior attentions.
Here, amongst many marks of refinement and intellectual culture, there
was a library and a gallery of portraits. In the library some of the
officers had detected sufficient evidences of the Swedish alliances
clandestinely maintained by the Landgrave; numbers of rare books,
bearing the arms of different imperial cities, which, in the several
campaigns of Gustavus, had been appropriated as they fell in his hands,
by way of fair reprisals for the robbery of the whole Palatine library
at Heidelberg, had been since transferred (as it thus appeared) to the
Landgrave, by purchase or as presents; and on either footing argued a
correspondence with the emperor's enemies, which hitherto he had
strenuously disavowed. The picture-gallery, it was very probable, had
been collected in the same manner. It contained little else than
portraits, but these were truly admirable and interesting, being all
recent works from the pencil of Vandyke, and composing a series of
heads and features the most remarkable for station in the one sex, or
for beauty in the other, which that age presented. Amongst them were
nearly all the imperial leaders of distinction, and many of the
Swedish. Maximilian and his brother officers took the liveliest
pleasure in perambulating this gallery with Paulina, and reviewing with
her these fine historical memorials. Out of their joint recollections,
or the facts of their personal experience, they were able to supply any
defective links in that commentary which her own knowledge of the
imperial court would have enabled her in so many instances to furnish
upon this martial register of the age.

The wars of the Netherlands had transplanted to Germany that stock upon
which the camps of the Thirty Years' War were originally raised.
Accordingly, a smaller gallery, at right angles with the great one,
presented a series of portraits from the old Spanish leaders and
Walloon partisans. From Egmont and Horn, the Duke of Alva and Parma,
down to Spinola, the last of that distinguished school of soldiers, no
man of eminence was omitted. Even the worthless and insolent Earl of
Leicester, with his gallant nephew,--that _ultimus Romanorum_ in
the rolls of chivalry,--were not excluded, though it was pretty evident
that a Catholic zeal had presided in forming the collection. For,
together with the Prince of Orange, and _Henri Quatre_, were to be
seen their vile assassins--portrayed with a lavish ostentation of
ornament, and enshrined in a frame so gorgeous as raised them in some
degree to the rank of consecrated martyrs.

From these past generations of eminent persons, who retained only a
traditional or legendary importance in the eyes of most who were now
reviewing them, all turned back with delight to the active spirits of
their own day, many of them yet living, and as warm with life and
heroic aspirations as their inimitable portraits had represented them.
Here was Tilly, the "little corporal" now recently stretched in a
soldier's grave, with his wily and inflexible features. Over against
him was his great enemy, who had first taught him the hard lesson of
retreating, Gustavus Adolphus, with his colossal bust, and "atlantean
shoulders, fit to bear the weight of mightiest monarchies." He also had
perished, and too probably by the double crime of assassination and
private treason; but the public glory of his short career was
proclaimed in the ungenerous exultations of Catholic Rome from Vienna
to Madrid, and the individual heroism in the lamentations of soldiers
under every banner which now floated in Europe. Beyond him ran the long
line of imperial generals,--from Wallenstein, the magnificent and the
imaginative, with Hamlet's infirmity of purpose, De Mercy, etc., down
to the heroes of partisan warfare, Holk, the Butlers, and the noble
Papenheim, or nobler Piccolomini. Below them were ranged Gustavus Horn,
Banier, the Prince of Saxe-Weimar, the Rhinegrave, and many other
Protestant commanders, whose names and military merits were familiar to
Paulina, though she now beheld their features for the first time.
Maximilian was here the best interpreter that she could possibly have
met with. For he had not only seen the greater part of them on the
field of battle, but, as a favorite and confidential officer of the
emperor's, had personally been concerned in diplomatic transactions
with the most distinguished amongst them.

Midnight insensibly surprised them whilst pursuing the many interesting
historical remembrances which the portraits called up. Most of the
company, upon this warning of the advanced hour, began to drop off;
some to rest, and some upon the summons of the military duty which
awaited them in their turn. In this way, Maximilian and Paulina were
gradually left alone, and now at length found a time which had not
before offered for communicating freely all that pressed upon their
hearts. Maximilian, on his part, going back to the period of their last
sudden separation, explained his own sudden disappearance from Vienna.
At a moment's warning, he had been sent off with sealed orders from the
emperor, to be first opened in Klosterheim: the mission upon which he
had been despatched was of consequence to the imperial interests, and
through his majesty's favor would eventually prove so to his own. Thus
it was that he had been peremptorily cut off from all opportunity of
communicating to herself the purpose and direction of his journey
previously to his departure from Vienna; and if his majesty had not
taken that care upon himself, but had contented himself, in the most
general terms, with assuring Paulina that Maximilian was absent on a
private mission, doubtless his intention had been the kind one of
procuring her a more signal surprise of pleasure upon his own sudden
return. Unfortunately, however, that return had become impossible:
things had latterly taken a turn which embarrassed himself, and
continued to require his presence. These perplexities had been for some
time known to the emperor; and, upon reflection, he doubted not that
her own journey, undertaken before his majesty could be aware of the
dangers which would beset its latter end, must in some way be connected
with the remedy which the emperor designed for this difficult affair.
But doubtless she herself was the bearer of sufficient explanations
from the imperial ministers on that head. Finally, whilst assuring her
that his own letters to herself had been as frequent as in any former
absence, Maximilian confessed that he did not feel greatly astonished
at the fact of none at all having reached her, when he recollected that
to the usual adverse accidents of war, daily intercepting all
messengers not powerfully escorted, were to be added, in this case, the
express efforts of private malignity in command of all the forest
passes.

This explanation recalled Paulina to a very painful sense of the
critical importance which might be attached to the papers which she had
lost. As yet, she had found no special opportunity, or, believing it of
less importance, had neglected it, for communicating more than the
general fact of a robbery. She now related the case more
circumstantially; and both were struck with it, as at this moment a
very heavy misfortune. Not only might her own perilous journey, and the
whole purposes of the emperor embarked upon it, be thus rendered
abortive; but their common enemies would by this time be possessed of
the whole information which had been so critically lost to their own
party, and perhaps would have it in their power to make use of
themselves as instruments for defeating their own most important hopes.

Maximilian sighed as he reflected on the probability that a far shorter
and bloodier event might defeat every earthly hope, within the next
twenty-four hours. But he dissembled his feelings; recovered even a
tone of gayety; and, begging of Paulina to dismiss this vexatious
incident from her thoughts, as a matter that after all would probably
be remedied by their first communication with the emperor, and before
any evil had resulted from it, he accompanied her to the entrance of
her own suite of chambers, and then returned to seek a few hours'
repose for himself on one of the sofas he had observed in one of the
small ante-rooms attached to the library.

The particular room which he selected for his purpose, on account of
its small size, and its warm appearance in other respects, was
furnished under foot with layers of heavy Turkey carpets, one laid upon
another (according to a fashion then prevalent in Germany), and on the
walls with tapestry. In this mode of hanging rooms, though sometimes
heavy and sombre, there was a warmth sensible and apparent, as well as
real, which peculiarly fitted it for winter apartments, and a massy
splendor which accorded with the style of dress and furniture in that
gorgeous age. One real disadvantage, however, it had as often employed;
it gave a ready concealment to intruders with evil intentions; and
under the protecting screen of tapestry many a secret had been
discovered, many robberies facilitated, and some celebrated murderers
had been sheltered with circumstances of mystery that forever baffled
investigation.

Maximilian smiled as the sight of the hangings, with their rich colors
glowing in the fire-light, brought back to his remembrance one of those
tales which in the preceding winter had made a great noise in Vienna.
With a soldier's carelessness, he thought lightly of all dangers that
could arise within four walls; and having extinguished the lights which
burned upon a table, and unbuckled his sabre, he threw himself upon a
sofa which he drew near to the fire; and then enveloping himself in a
large horseman's cloak, he courted the approach of sleep. The fatigues
of the day, and of the preceding night, had made this in some measure
needful to him. But weariness is not always the best preface to repose;
and the irritation of many busy anxieties continued for some time to
keep him in a most uneasy state of vigilance. As he lay, he could see
on one side the fantastic figures in the fire composed of wood and
turf; on the other side, looking to the tapestry, he saw the wild
forms, and the _męlée_, little less fantastic, of human and brute
features in a chase--a boar-chase in front, and a stag-chase on his
left hand. These, as they rose fitfully in bright masses of color and
of savage expression under the lambent flashing of the fire, continued
to excite his irritable state of feeling; and it was not for some time
that he felt this uneasy condition give way to exhaustion. He was at
length on the very point of falling asleep, or perhaps had already
fallen into its very lightest and earliest stage, when the echo of a
distant door awoke him. He had some slight impression that a noise in
his own room had concurred with the other and more distant one to awake
him. But, after raising himself for a moment on his elbow and
listening, he again resigned himself to sleep.

Again, however, and probably before he had slept a minute, he was
roused by a double disturbance. A low rustling was heard in some part
of the room, and a heavy foot upon a neighboring staircase. Housed, at
length, to the prudence of paying some attention to sounds so stealthy,
in a situation beset with dangers, he rose and threw open the door. A
corridor, which ran round the head of the staircase, was lit up with a
brilliant light; and he could command from this station one flight of
the stairs. On these he saw nothing; all was now wrapt in a soft
effulgence of light, and in absolute silence. No sound recurring after
a minute's attention, and indisposed by weariness to any stricter
examination, where all examination from one so little acquainted with
the localities might prove unavailing, he returned to his own room;
but, before again lying down, he judged it prudent to probe the
concealments of the tapestry by carrying his sabre round, and
everywhere pressing the hangings to the wall. In this trial he met with
no resistance at any point; and willingly believing that he had been
deceived, or that his ear had exaggerated some trivial sound, in a
state of imperfect slumber, he again laid down and addressed himself to
sleep. Still there were remembrances which occurred at this moment to
disturb him. The readiness with which they had been received at the
chateau was in itself suspicious. He remembered the obstinate haunting
of their camp on the preceding night, and the robbery conducted with so
much knowledge of circumstances. Jonas Melk, the brutal landlord of
Waldenhausen, a man known to him by repute (though not personally), as
one of the vilest agents employed by the Landgrave, had been actively
engaged in his master's service at their preceding stage. He was
probably one of those who haunted the wood through the night. And he
had been repeatedly informed through the course of the day that this
man in particular, whose features were noticed by the yagers, on
occasion of their officer's reproach to him, had been seen at intervals
in company with others, keeping a road parallel to their own, and
steadily watching their order of advance.

These recollections, now laid together, impressed him with some
uneasiness. But overpowering weariness gave him a strong interest in
dismissing them. And a soldier, with the images of fifty combats fresh
in his mind, does not willingly admit the idea of danger from a single
arm, and in a situation of household security. Pshaw! he exclaimed,
with some disdain, as these martial remembrances rose up before him,
especially as the silence had now continued undisturbed for a quarter
of an hour. In five minutes more he had fallen profoundly asleep; and,
in less than one half-hour, as he afterwards judged, he was suddenly
awakened by a dagger at his throat.

At one bound he sprung upon his feet. The cloak, in which he had been
enveloped, caught upon some of the buckles or ornamented work of his
appointments, and for a moment embarrassed his motions. There was no
light, except what came from the sullen and intermitting gleams of the
fire. But even this was sufficient to show him the dusky outline of two
figures. With the foremost he grappled, and, raising him in his arms,
threw him powerfully upon the floor, with a force that left him stunned
and helpless. The other had endeavored to pinion his arms from behind;
for the body-armor, which Maximilian had not laid aside for the night,
under the many anticipations of service which their situation
suggested, proved a sufficient protection against the blows of the
assassin's poniard. Impatient of the darkness and uncertainty,
Maximilian rushed to the door and flung it violently open. The assassin
still clung to his arms, conscious that if he once forfeited his hold
until he had secured a retreat, he should be taken at disadvantage. But
Maximilian, now drawing a petronel which hung at his belt, cocked it as
rapidly as his embarrassed motions allowed him. The assassin faltered,
conscious that a moment's relaxation of grasp would enable his
antagonist to turn the muzzle over his shoulder. Maximilian, on the
other hand, now perfectly awake, and with the benefit of that self-
possession which the other so entirely wanted, felt the nervous tremor
in the villain's hands; and, profiting by this moment of indecision,
made a desperate effort, released one arm, which he used with so much
effect as immediately to liberate the other, and then intercepting the
passage to the stairs, wheeled round upon his murderous enemy, and,
presenting the petronel to his breast, bade him surrender his arms if
he hoped for quarter.

The man was an athletic, and, obviously, a most powerful ruffian. On
his face he carried more than one large glazed cicatrix, that assisted
the savage expression of malignity impressed by nature upon his
features. And his matted black hair, with its elf locks, completed the
picturesque effect of a face that proclaimed, in every lineament, a
reckless abandonment to cruelty and ferocious passions. Maximilian
himself, familiar as he was with the faces of military butchers in the
dreadful hours of sack and carnage, recoiled for one instant from this
hideous ruffian, who had not even the palliations of youth in his
favor, for he seemed fifty at the least. All this had passed in an
instant of time; and now, as he recovered himself from his momentary
shock at so hateful an expression of evil passions, great was
Maximilian's astonishment to perceive his antagonist apparently
speechless, and struggling with some over-mastering sense of horror,
that convulsed his features, and for a moment glazed his eye.

Maximilian looked around for the object of his alarm; but in vain. In
reality it was himself, in connection with some too dreadful
remembrances, now suddenly awakened, that had thus overpowered the
man's nerves. The brilliant light of a large chandelier, which overhung
the staircase, fell strongly upon Maximilian's features; and the
excitement of the moment gave to them the benefit of their fullest
expression. Prostrate on the ground, and abandoning his dagger without
an effort at retaining it, the man gazed, as if under a rattlesnake's
fascination, at the young soldier before him. Suddenly he recovered his
voice; and, with a piercing cry of unaffected terror, exclaimed, "Save
me, save me, blessed Virgin! Prince, noble prince, forgive me! Will the
grave not hold its own? Jesu Maria! who could have believed it?"

"Listen, fellow!" interrupted Maximilian. "What prince is it you speak
of? For whom do you take me? speak truly, and abuse riot my
forbearance."

"Ha! and his own voice too! and here on this spot! God is just! Yet do
thou, good patron, holy St. Ermengarde, deliver me from the avenger!"

"Man, you rave! Stand up, recover yourself, and answer me to what I
shall ask thee: speak truly, and thou shalt have thy life. Whose gold
was it that armed thy hand against one who had injured neither thee nor
thine?"

But he spoke to one who could no longer hear. The man grovelled on the
ground, and hid his face from a being, whom, in some incomprehensible
way, he regarded as an apparition from the other world.

Multitudes of persons had by this time streamed in, summoned by the
noise of the struggle from all parts of the chateau. Some fancied that,
in the frenzied assassin on the ground, whose panic too manifestly
attested itself as genuine, they recognized one of those who had so
obstinately dogged them by side-paths in the forest. Whoever he were,
and upon whatever mission employed, he was past all rational
examination; at the aspect of Maximilian, he relapsed into convulsive
horrors, which soon became too fit for medical treatment to allow of
any useful judicial inquiry; and for the present he was consigned to
the safe-keeping of the provost-martial.

His companion, meantime, had profited by his opportunity, and the
general confusion, to effect his escape. Nor was this difficult.
Perhaps, in the consternation of the first moment, and the exclusive
attention that settled upon the party in the corridor, he might even
have mixed in the crowd. But this was not necessary. For, on raising
the tapestry, a door was discovered which opened into a private
passage, having a general communication with the rest of the rooms on
that floor. Steps were now taken, by sentries disposed through the
interior of the mansion, at proper points, to secure themselves from
the enemies who lurked within, whom hitherto they had too much
neglected for the avowed and more military assailants who menaced them
from without. Security was thus restored. But a deep impression
accompanied the party to their couches of the profound political
motives, or (in the absence of those) of the rancorous personal
malignity, which could prompt such obstinate persecution; by modes,
also, and by hands, which encountered so many chances of failing; and
which, even in the event of the very completest success for the
present, could not be expected, under the eyes of so many witnesses, to
escape a final exposure. Some enemy, of unusual ferocity, was too
obviously working in the dark, and by agencies as mysterious as his own
purpose.

Meantime, in the city of Klosterheim, the general interest in the
fortunes of the approaching travellers had suffered no abatement, and
some circumstances had occurred to increase the popular irritation. It
was known that Maximilian had escaped with a strong party of friends
from the city; but how, or by whose connivance, could in no way be
discovered. This had drawn upon all persons who were known as active
partisans against the Landgrave, or liable to suspicion as friends of
Maximilian, a vexatious persecution from the military police of the
town. Some had been arrested; many called upon to give security for
their future behavior; and all had been threatened or treated with
harshness. Hence, as well as from previous irritation and alarm on
account of the party from Vienna, the whole town was in a state of
extreme agitation.

Klosterheim, in the main features of its political distractions,
reflected, almost as in a representative picture, the condition of many
another German city. At that period, by very ancient ties of reciprocal
service, strengthened by treaties, by religious faith, and by personal
attachment to individuals of the imperial house, this ancient and
sequestered city was inalienably bound to the interests of the emperor.
Both the city and the university were Catholic. Princes of the imperial
family, and Papal commissioners, who had secret motives for not
appearing at Vienna, had more than once found a hospitable reception
within the walls. And, amongst many acts of grace by which the emperors
had acknowledged these services and marks of attachment, one of them
had advanced a very large sum of money to the city chest for an
indefinite time; receiving in return, as the warmest testimony of
confidential gratitude which the city could bestow, that _jus liberi
ingressus_ which entitled the emperor's armies to a free passage at
all times, and, in case of extremity, to the right of keeping the city
gates and maintaining a garrison in the citadel. Unfortunately,
Klosterheim was not _sui juris_, or on the roll of free cities of
the empire, but of the nature of an appanage in the family of the
Landgrave of X----; and this circumstance had produced a double
perplexity in the politics of the city; for the late Landgrave, who had
been assassinated in a very mysterious manner upon a hunting party,
benefited to the fullest extent both by the political and religious
bias of the city--being a personal friend of the emperor's, a Catholic,
amiable in his deportment, and generally beloved by his subjects. But
the prince who had succeeded him in the Landgraviate, as the next heir,
was everywhere odious for the harshness of his government, no less than
for the gloomy austerity of his character; and to Klosterheim in
particular, which had been pronounced by some of the first
jurisprudents a female appanage, he presented himself under the
additional disadvantages of a very suspicious title, and a Swedish bias
too notorious to be disguised. At a time when the religious and
political attachments of Europe were brought into collisions so
strange, that the foremost auxiliary of the Protestant interest in
Germany was really the most distinguished cardinal in the church of
Rome, it did not appear inconsistent with this strong leaning to the
King of Sweden that the Landgrave was privately known to be a Catholic
bigot, who practised the severest penances, and, tyrant as he showed
himself to all others, grovelled himself as an abject devotee at the
feet of a haughty confessor. Amongst the populace of Klosterheim this
feature of his character, confronted with the daily proofs of his
entire vassalage to the Swedish interest, passed for the purest
hypocrisy; and he had credit for no religion at all with the world at
large. But the fact was otherwise. Conscious from the first that he
held even the Landgraviate by a slender title (for he was no more than
cousin once removed to his immediate predecessor), and that his
pretensions upon Klosterheim had separate and peculiar defects,--
sinking of course with the failure of his claim as Landgrave, but not,
therefore, prospering with its success,--he was aware that none but the
most powerful arm could keep his princely cap upon his head. The
competitors for any part of his possessions, one and all, had thrown
themselves upon the emperor's protection. This, if no other reason,
would have thrown him into the arms of Gustavus Adolphus; and with
this, as it happened, other reasons of local importance had then and
since cooperated. Time, as it advanced, brought increase of weight to
all these motives. Rumors of a dark and ominous tendency, arising no
one knew whence, nor by whom encouraged, pointed injuriously to the
past history of the Landgrave, and to some dreadful exposures which
were hanging over his head. A lady, at present in obscurity, was
alluded to as the agent of redress to others, through her own heavy
wrongs; and these rumors were the more acceptable to the people of
Klosterheim, because they connected the impending punishment of the
hated Landgrave with the restoration of the imperial connection; for,
it was still insinuated, under every version of these mysterious
reports, that the emperor was the ultimate supporter, in the last
resort, of the lurking claims now on the point of coming forward to
challenge public attention. Under these alarming notices, and fully
aware that sooner or later he must be thrown into collision with the
imperial court, the Landgrave had now for some time made up his mind to
found a merit with the Swedish chancellor and general officers, by
precipitating an uncompromising rupture with his Catholic enemies, and
thus to extract the grace of a voluntary act from what, in fact, he
knew to be sooner or later inevitable.

Such was the positive and relative aspect of the several interests
which were now struggling in Klosterheim. Desperate measures were
contemplated by both parties; and, as opportunities should arise, and
proper means should develop themselves, more than one party might be
said to stand on the brink of great explosions. Conspiracies were
moving in darkness, both in the council of the burghers and of the
university. Imperfect notices of their schemes, and sometimes delusive
or misleading notices, had reached the Landgrave. The city, the
university, and the numerous convents, were crowded to excess with
refugees. Malcontents of every denomination and every shade,--
emissaries of all the factions which then agitated Germany; reformado
soldiers, laid aside by their original employers, under new
arrangements, or from private jealousies of new commanders; great
persons with special reasons for courting a temporary seclusion, and
preserving a strict incognito; misers, who fled with their hoards of
gold and jewels to the city of refuge; desolate ladies, from the
surrounding provinces, in search of protection for themselves, or for
the honor of their daughters; and (not least distinguished among the
many classes of fugitives) prophets and enthusiasts of every
description, whom the magnitude of the political events, and their
religious origin, so naturally called forth in swarms; these, and many
more, in connection with their attendants, troops, students, and the
terrified peasantry, from a circle of forty miles radius around the
city as a centre, had swelled the city of Klosterheim, from a total of
about seventeen, to six or seven and thirty thousand. War, with a
slight reserve for the late robberies of Holkerstein, had as yet spared
this favored nook of Germany. The great storm had whistled and raved
around them; but hitherto none had penetrated the sylvan sanctuary
which on every side invested this privileged city. The ground seemed
charmed by some secret spells, and consecrated from intrusion. For the
great tempest had often swept directly upon them, and yet still had
wheeled off, summoned away by some momentary call, to some remoter
attraction. But now at length all things portended that, if the war
should revive in strength after this brief suspension, it would fall
with accumulated weight upon this yet unravaged district.

This was the anticipation which had governed the Landgrave's policy in
so sternly and barbarously interfering with the generous purposes of
the Klosterheimers, for carrying over a safe-conduct to their friends
and visitors, when standing on the margin of the forest. The robber
Holkerstein, if not expressly countenanced by the Swedes, and secretly
nursed up to his present strength by Richelieu, was at any rate
embarked upon a system of aggression which would probably terminate in
connecting him with one or other of those authentic powers. In any
case, he stood committed to a course of continued offence upon the
imperial interests; since in that quarter his injuries and insults were
already past forgiveness. The interest of Holkerstein, then, ran in the
same channel with that of the Landgrave. It was impolitic to weaken
him. It was doubly impolitic to weaken him by a measure which must also
weaken the Landgrave; for any deduction from his own military force, or
from the means of recruiting it, was in that proportion a voluntary
sacrifice of the weight he should obtain with the Swedes on making the
junction, which he now firmly counted on, with their forces. But a
result which he still more dreaded from the cooperation of the
Klosterheimers with the caravan from Vienna, was the probable overthrow
of that supremacy in the city, which even now was so nicely balanced in
his favor that a slight reinforcement to the other side would turn the
scale against him.

In all these calculations of policy, and the cruel measures by which he
supported them, he was guided by the counsels of Luigi Adorni, a subtle
Italian, whom he had elevated from the post of a private secretary to
that of sole minister for the conduct of state affairs. This man, who
covered a temperament of terrific violence with a masque of Venetian
dissimulation and the most icy reserve, met with no opposition, unless
it were occasionally from Father Anselm, the confessor. He delighted in
the refinements of intrigue, and in the most tortuous labyrinths of
political manuvring, purely for their own sakes; and sometimes
defeated his own purposes by mere superfluity of diplomatic subtlety;
which hardly, however, won a momentary concern from him, in the
pleasure he experienced at having found an undeniable occasion for
equal subtlety in unweaving his own webs of deception. He had been
confounded by the evasion of Maximilian and his friends from the orders
of the Landgrave; and the whole energy of his nature was bent to the
discovery of the secret avenues which had opened the means to this
elopement.

There were, in those days, as is well known to German antiquaries, few
castles or fortresses of much importance in Germany, which did not
communicate by subterraneous passages with the exterior country. In
many instances these passages were of surprising extent, first emerging
to the light in some secluded spot among rocks or woods, at the
distance of two, three, or even four miles. There were cases even in
which they were carried below the beds of rivers as broad and deep as
the Rhine, the Elbe, or the Danube. Sometimes there were several of
such communications on different faces of the fortress; and sometimes
each of these branched, at some distance from the building, into
separate arms, opening at intervals widely apart. And the uses of such
secret communications with the world outside, and beyond a besieging
enemy, in a land like Germany, with its prodigious subdivision of
independent states and free cities, were far greater than they could
have been in any one great continuous principality.

In many fortified places these passages had existed from the middle
ages. In Klosterheim they had possibly as early an origin: but by this
period it is very probable that the gradual accumulation of rubbish,
through a course of centuries, would have unfitted them for use, had
not the Peasants' War, in the time of Luther's reformation, little more
than one hundred years before, given occasion for their use and repair.
At that time Klosterheim had stood a siege, which, from the defect of
artillery, was at no time formidable in a military sense; but as a
blockade, formed suddenly when the citizens were slenderly furnished
with provisions, it would certainly have succeeded, and delivered up
the vast wealth of the convents as a spoil to the peasantry, had it not
been for one in particular of these subterraneous passages, which,
opening on the opposite side of the little river Iltiss, in a thick
_boccage_, where the enemy had established no posts, furnished the
means of introducing a continual supply of fresh provisions, to the
great triumph of the garrison, and the utter dismay of the
superstitious peasants, who looked upon the mysterious supply as a
providential bounty to a consecrated cause.

So memorable a benefit had given to this one passage a publicity and an
historical importance which made all its circumstances, and amongst
those its internal mouth, familiar even to children. But this was
evidently _not_ the avenue by which Maximilian had escaped into
the forest. For it opened externally on the wrong side of the river,
whilst everybody knew that its domestic opening was in one of the
chapels of the _schloss_; and another circumstance, equally
decisive, was, that a long flight of stairs, by which it descended
below the bed of the river, made it impassable to horses.

Every attempt, however, failed to trace out the mode of egress for the
present. By his spies Adorni doubted not to find it soon; and, in the
mean time, that as much as possible the attention of the public might
be abstracted from the travellers and their concerns, a public
proclamation was issued, forbidding all resort of crowds to the walls.
These were everywhere dispersed on the ninth; and for that day were
partially obeyed. But there was little chance that, with any fresh
excitement to the popular interest, they would continue to command
respect.


CHAPTER VI.


The morning of the tenth at length arrived--that day on which the
expected travellers from Vienna, and all whom they had collected on
their progress, ardently looked to rejoin their long-separated friends
in Klosterheim, and by those friends were not less ardently looked for.
On each side there were the same violent yearnings, on each side the
same dismal arid overpowering fears. Each party arose with palpitating
hearts: the one looked out from Falkenberg with longing eyes, to
discover the towers of Klosterheim; the other, from the upper windows
or roofs of Klosterheim, seemed as if they could consume the distance
between themselves and Falkenberg. But a little tract of forest ground
was interposed between friends and friends, parents and children,
lovers and their beloved. Not more than eighteen miles of shadowy
woods, of lawns, and sylvan glades, divided hearts that would either
have encountered death, or many deaths, for the other. These were
regions of natural peace and tranquillity, that in any ordinary times
should have been peopled by no worse inhabitants than the timid hare
scudding homewards to its form, or the wild deer sweeping by with
thunder to their distant lairs. But now from every glen or thicket
armed marauders might be ready to start. Every gleam of sunshine in
some seasons was reflected from the glittering arms of parties
threading the intricacies of the thickets; and the sudden alarum of the
trumpet rang oftentimes in the nights, and awoke the echoes that for
centuries had been undisturbed, except by the hunter's horn, in the
most sequestered haunts of these vast woods.

Towards noon it became known, by signals that had been previously
concerted between Maximilian and his college friends, that the party
were advanced upon their road from Falkenberg, and, therefore, must of
necessity on this day abide the final trial. As this news was dispersed
abroad, the public anxiety rose to so feverish a point, that crowds
rushed from every quarter to the walls, and it was not judged prudent
to measure the civic strength against their enthusiasm. For an hour or
two the nature of the ground and the woods forbade any view of the
advancing party: but at length, some time before the light failed, the
head of the column, and soon after the entire body, was descried
surmounting a little hill, not more than eight miles distant. The black
mass presented by mounted travellers and baggage-wagons was visible to
piercing eyes; and the dullest could distinguish the glancing of arms,
which at times flashed upwards from the more open parts of the forest.

Thus far, then, their friends had made their way without injury; and
this point was judged to be within nine miles' distance. But in thirty
or forty minutes, when they had come nearer by a mile and a half, the
scene had somewhat changed. A heathy tract of ground, perhaps two miles
in length, opened in the centre of the thickest woods, and formed a
little island of clear ground, where all beside was tangled and crowded
with impediments. Just as the travelling party began to deploy out of
the woods upon this area at its further extremity, a considerable body
of mounted troops emerged from the forest, which had hitherto concealed
them, at the point nearest to Klosterheim. They made way rapidly; and
in less than half a minute it became evident, by the motions of the
opposite party, that they had been descried, and that hasty
preparations were making for receiving them. A dusky mass, probably the
black yagers, galloped up rapidly to the front and formed; after which
it seemed to some eyes that the whole party again advanced, but still
more slowly than before.

Every heart upon the walls of Klosterheim palpitated with emotion, as
the two parties neared each other. Many almost feared to draw their
breath, many writhed their persons in the anguish of rueful
expectation, as they saw the moment approach when the two parties would
shock together. At length it came; and, to the astonishment of the
spectators, not more, perhaps, than of the travellers themselves, the
whole cavalcade of strangers swept by, without halting for so much as a
passing salute or exchange of news.

The first cloud, then, which had menaced their friends, was passed off
as suddenly as it had gathered. But this, by some people, was thought
to bear no favorable construction. To ride past a band of travellers
from remote parts on such uncourteous terms argued no friendly spirit;
and many motives might be imagined perfectly consistent with hostile
intentions for passing the travellers unassailed, and thus gaining the
means of coming at any time upon their rear. Prudent persons shook
their heads, and the issue of an affair anticipated with so much
anxiety certainly did not diminish it.

It was now four o'clock: in an hour or less it would be dark; and,
considering the peculiar difficulties of the ground on nearing the
town, and the increasing exhaustion of the horses, it was not judged
possible that a party of travellers, so unequal in their equipments,
and amongst whom the weakest was now become a law for the motion of the
quickest, could reach the gates of Klosterheim before nine o'clock.

Soon after this, and just before the daylight faded, the travellers
reached the nearer end of the heath, and again entered the woods. The
cold and the darkness were now becoming greater at every instant, and
it might have been expected that the great mass of the spectators would
leave their station; but such was the intensity of the public interest,
that few quitted the walls except for the purpose of reinforcing their
ability to stay and watch the progress of their friends. This could be
done with even greater effect as the darkness deepened, for every
second horseman carried a torch; and, as much perhaps by way of signal
to their friends in Klosterheim, as for their own convenience,
prodigious flambeaux were borne aloft on halberds. These rose to a
height which surmounted all the lower bushes, and were visible in all
parts of the woods,--even the smaller lights, in the leafless state of
the trees at this season of the year, could be generally traced without
difficulty; and composing a brilliant chain of glittering points, as it
curved and humored the road amongst the labyrinths of the forest, would
have produced a singularly striking effect to eyes at leisure to enjoy
it.

In this way, for about three hours, the travellers continued to advance
unmolested, and to be traced by their friends in Klosterheim. It was
now considerably after seven o'clock, and perhaps an hour, or, at most,
an hour and a half, would bring them to the city gates. All hearts
began to beat high with expectation, and hopes were loudly and
confidently expressed through every part of the crowd that the danger
might now be considered as past. Suddenly, as if expressly to rebuke
the too presumptuous confidence of those who were thus thoughtlessly
sanguine, the blare of a trumpet was heard from a different quarter of
the forest, and about two miles to the right of the city. Every eye was
fastened eagerly upon the spot from which the notes issued. Probably
the signal had proceeded from a small party in advance of a greater;
for in the same direction, but at a much greater distance, perhaps not
less than three miles in the rear of the trumpet, a very large body of
horse was now descried coming on at a great pace upon the line already
indicated by the trumpet. The extent of the column might be estimated
by the long array of torches, which were carried apparently by every
fourth or fifth man; and that they were horsemen was manifest from the
very rapid pace at which they advanced.

At this spectacle, a cry of consternation ran along the whole walls of
Klosterheim. Here, then, at last, were coming the spoilers and butchers
of their friends; for the road upon which they were advancing issued at
right angles into that upon which the travellers, apparently unwarned
of their danger, were moving. The hideous scene of carnage would
possibly pass immediately below their own eyes; for the point of
junction between the two roads was directly commanded by the eye from
the city walls; and, upon computing the apparent proportions of speed
between the two parties, it seemed likely enough that upon this very
ground, the best fitted of any that could have been selected, in a
scenical sense, as a stage for bringing a spectacle below the eyes of
Klosterheim, the most agitating of spectacles would be exhibited,--
friends and kinsmen engaged in mortal struggle with remorseless
freebooters, under circumstances which denied to themselves any chance
of offering assistance.

Exactly at this point of time arose a dense mist, which wrapped the
whole forest in darkness, and withdrew from the eyes of the agitated
Klosterheimers friends and foes alike. They continued, however, to
occupy the walls, endeavoring to penetrate the veil which now concealed
the fortunes of their travelling friends, by mere energy and intensity
of attention. The mist, meantime, did not disperse, but rather
continued to deepen; the two parties, however, gradually drew so much
nearer, that some judgment could be at length formed of their motions
and position, merely by the ear. From the stationary character of the
sounds, and the continued recurrence of charges and retreats sounded
upon the trumpet, it became evident that the travellers and the enemy
had at length met, and too probable that they were engaged in a
sanguinary combat. Anxiety had now reached its utmost height; and some
were obliged to leave the walls, or were carried away by their friends,
under the effects of overwrought sensibility.

Ten o'clock had now struck, and for some time the sounds had been
growing sensibly weaker; and at last it was manifest that the two
parties had separated, and that one, at least, was moving off from the
scene of action; and, as the sounds grew feebler and feebler, there
could be no doubt that it was the enemy, who was drawing off into the
distance from the field of battle.

The enemy! ay, but how? Under what circumstances? As victor? Perhaps
even as the captor of their friends! Or, if not, and he were really
retreating as a fugitive and beaten foe, with what hideous sacrifices
on the part of their friends might not that result have been purchased?

Long and dreary was the interval before these questions could be
answered. Full three hours had elapsed since the last sound of a
trumpet had been heard; it was now one o'clock, and as yet no trace of
the travellers had been discovered in any quarter. The most hopeful
began to despond; and general lamentations prevailed throughout
Klosterheim.

Suddenly, however, a dull sound arose within a quarter of a mile from
the city gate, as of some feeble attempt to blow a blast upon a
trumpet. In five minutes more a louder blast was sounded close to the
gate. Questions were joyfully put, and as joyfully answered. The usual
precautions were rapidly gone through; and the officer of the watch
being speedily satisfied as to the safety of the measure, the gates
were thrown open, and the unfortunate travellers, exhausted by fatigue,
hardships, and suffering of every description, were at length admitted
into the bosom of a friendly town.

The spectacle was hideous which the long cavalcade exhibited as it
wound up the steep streets which led to the market-place. Wagons
fractured and splintered in every direction, upon which were stretched
numbers of gallant soldiers, with wounds hastily dressed, from which
the blood had poured in streams upon their gay habiliments; horses,
whose limbs had been mangled by the sabre; and coaches, or caleches,
loaded with burthens of dead and dying; these were amongst the objects
which occupied the van in the line of march, as the travellers defiled
through Klosterheim. The vast variety of faces, dresses, implements of
war, or ensigns of rank, thrown together in the confusion of night and
retreat, illuminated at intervals by bright streams of light from
torches or candles in the streets, or at the windows of the houses,
composed a picture which resembled the chaos of a dream, rather than
any ordinary spectacle of human life.

In the market-place the whole party were gradually assembled, and there
it was intended that they should receive the billets for their several
quarters. But such was the pressure of friends and relatives gathering
from all directions, to salute and welcome the objects of their
affectionate anxiety, or to inquire after their fate; so tumultuous was
the conflict of grief and joy (and not seldom in the very same group),
that for a long time no authority could control the violence of public
feeling, or enforce the arrangements which had been adopted for the
night. Nor was it even easy to learn, where the questions were put by
so many voices at once, what had been the history of the night. It was
at length, however, collected, that they had been met and attacked with
great fury by Holkerstein, or a party acting under one of his
lieutenants. Their own march had been so warily conducted after
nightfall, that this attack did not find them unprepared. A barrier of
coaches and wagons had been speedily formed in such an arrangement as
to cripple the enemy's movements, and to neutralize great part of his
superiority in the quality of his horses. The engagement, however, had
been severe; and the enemy's attack, though many times baffled, had
been as often renewed, until, at length, the young general Maximilian,
seeing that the affair tended to no apparent termination, that the
bloodshed was great, and that the horses were beginning to knock up
under the fatigue of such severe service, had brought up the very
_elite_ of his reserve, placed himself at their head, and, making
a dash expressly at their leader, had the good fortune to cut him down.
The desperateness of the charge, added to the loss of their leader, had
intimidated the enemy, who now began to draw off, as from an enterprise
which was likely to cost them more blood than a final success could
have rewarded. Unfortunately, however, Maximilian, disabled by a severe
wound, and entangled by his horse amongst the enemy, had been carried
off a prisoner. In the course of the battle all their torches had been
extinguished; and this circumstance, as much as the roughness of the
road, the ruinous condition of their carriages and appointments, and
their own exhaustion, had occasioned their long delay in reaching
Klosterheim, after the battle was at an end. Signals they had not
ventured to make; for they were naturally afraid of drawing upon their
track any fresh party of marauders, by so open a warning of their
course as the sound of a trumpet.

These explanations were rapidly dispersed through Klosterheim; party
after party drew off to their quarters; and at length the agitated city
was once again restored to peace. The Lady Paulina had been amongst the
first to retire. She was met by the lady abbess of a principal convent
in Klosterheim, to whose care she had been recommended by the emperor.
The Landgrave also had furnished her with a guard of honor; but all
expressions of respect, or even of kindness, seemed thrown away upon
her, so wholly was she absorbed in grief for the capture of Maximilian,
and in gloomy anticipations of his impending fate.


CHAPTER VII.


The city of Klosterheim was now abandoned to itself, and strictly shut
up within its own walls. All roaming beyond those limits was now indeed
forbidden even more effectually by the sword of the enemy than by the
edicts of the Landgrave. War was manifestly gathering in its
neighborhood. Little towns and castles within a range of seventy miles,
on almost every side, were now daily occupied by imperial or Swedish
troops. Not a week passed without some news of fresh military
accessions, or of skirmishes between parties of hostile foragers.
Through the whole adjacent country, spite of the severe weather, bodies
of armed men were weaving to and fro, fast as a weaver's shuttle. The
forest rang with alarums, and sometimes, under gleams of sunshine, the
leafless woods seemed on fire with the restless splendor of spear and
sword, morion and breast-plate, or the glittering equipments of the
imperial cavalry. Couriers, or Bohemian gypsies, which latter were a
class of people at this time employed by all sides as spies or
messengers, continually stole in with secret despatches to the
Landgrave, or (under the color of bringing public news, and the reports
of military movements) to execute some private mission for rich
employers in town; sometimes making even this clandestine business but
a cover to other purposes, too nearly connected with treason, or
reputed treason, to admit of any but oral communication.

What were the ulterior views in this large accumulation of military
force, no man pretended to know. A great battle, for various reasons,
was not expected. But changes were so sudden, and the counsels of each
day so often depended on the accidents of the morning, that an entire
campaign might easily be brought on, or the whole burthen of war for
years to come might be transferred to this quarter of the land, without
causing any very great surprise. Meantime, enough was done already to
give a full foretaste of war and its miseries to this sequestered nook,
so long unvisited by that hideous scourge.

In the forest, where the inhabitants were none, excepting those who
lived upon the borders, and small establishments of the Landgrave's
servants at different points, for executing the duties of the forest or
the chase, this change expressed itself chiefly by the tumultuous
uproar of the wild deer, upon whom a murderous war was kept up by
parties detached daily from remote and opposite quarters, to collect
provisions for the half-starving garrisons, so recently, and with so
little previous preparation, multiplied on the forest skirts. For,
though the country had been yet unexhausted by war, too large a
proportion of the tracts adjacent to the garrisons were in a wild,
sylvan condition to afford any continued supplies to so large and
sudden an increase of the population; more especially as, under the
rumors of this change, every walled town in a compass of a hundred
miles, many of them capable of resisting a sudden _coup-de-main_,
and resolutely closing their gates upon either party, had already
possessed themselves by purchase of all the surplus supplies which the
country yielded. In such a state of things, the wild deer became an
object of valuable consideration to all parties, and a murderous war
was made upon them from every side of the forest. From the city walls
they were seen in sweeping droves, flying before the Swedish cavalry
for a course of ten, fifteen, or even thirty miles, until headed and
compelled to turn by another party breaking suddenly from a covert,
where they had been waiting their approach. Sometimes it would happen
that this second party proved to be a body of imperialists, who were
carried by the ardor of the chase into the very centre of their enemies
before either was aware of any hostile approach. Then, according to
circumstances, came sudden flight or tumultuary skirmish; the woods
rang with the hasty summons of the trumpet; the deer reeled off aslant
from the furious shock, and, benefiting for the moment by those fierce
hostilities, originally the cause of their persecution, fled far away
from the scene of strife; and not unfrequently came thundering beneath
the city walls, and reporting to the spectators above, by their
agitation and affrighted eyes, those tumultuous disturbances in some
remoter part of the forest, which had already reached them in an
imperfect way, by the interrupted and recurring echoes of the points of
war--charges or retreats--sounded upon the trumpet.

But, whilst on the outside of her walls Klosterheim beheld even this
unpopulous region all alive with military license and outrage, she
suffered no violence from either party herself. This immunity she owed
to her peculiar political situation. The emperor had motives for
conciliating the city; the Swedes, for conciliating the Landgrave;
indeed, they were supposed to have made a secret alliance with him, for
purposes known only to the contracting parties. And the difference
between the two patrons was simply this: that the emperor was sincere,
and, if not disinterested, had an interest concurring with that of
Klosterheim in the paternal protection which he offered; whereas the
Swedes, in this, as in all their arrangements, regarding Germany as a
foreign country, looked only to the final advantages of Sweden, or its
German dependences, and to the weight which such alliances would
procure them in a general pacification. And hence, in the war which
both combined to make upon the forest, the one party professed to
commit spoil upon the Landgrave, as distinguished from the city; whilst
the Swedish allies of that prince prosecuted their ravages in the
Landgrave's name, as essential to the support of his cause.

For the present, however, the Swedes were the preponderant party in the
neighborhood; they had fortified the chateau of Falkenberg, and made it
a very strong military post; at the same time, however, sending in to
Klosterheim whatsoever was valuable amongst the furniture of that
establishment, with a care which of itself proclaimed the footing upon
which they were anxious to stand with the Landgrave.

Encouraged by the vicinity of his military friends, that prince now
began to take a harsher tone in Klosterheim. The minor princes of
Germany at that day were all tyrants in virtue of their privileges; and
if in some rarer cases they exercised these privileges in a forbearing
spirit, their subjects were well aware that they were indebted for this
extraordinary indulgence to the temper and gracious nature of the
individual, not to the firm protection of the laws. But the most
reasonable and mildest of the German princes had been little taught at
that day to brook opposition. And the Landgrave was by nature, and the
gloominess of his constitutional temperament, of all men the last to
learn that lesson readily. He had already met with just sufficient
opposition from the civic body and the university interest to excite
his passion for revenge. Ample indemnification he determined upon for
his wounded pride; and he believed that the time and circumstances were
now matured for favoring his most vindictive schemes. The Swedes were
at hand, and a slight struggle with the citizens would remove all
obstacles to their admission into the garrison; though, for some
private reasons, he wished to abstain from this extremity, if it should
prove possible. Maximilian also was absent, and might never return. The
rumor was even that he was killed; and though the caution of Adorni and
the Landgrave led them to a hesitating reliance upon what might be a
political fabrication of the opposite party, yet at all events he was
detained from Klosterheim by some pressing necessity; and the period of
his absence, whether long or short, the Landgrave resolved to improve
in such a way as should make his return unavailing.

Of Maximilian the Landgrave had no personal knowledge; he had not so
much as seen him. But by his spies and intelligencers he was well aware
that he had been the chief combiner and animater of the imperial party
against himself in the university, and by his presence had given life
and confidence to that party in the city which did not expressly
acknowledge him as their head. He was aware of the favor which
Maximilian enjoyed with the emperor, and knew in general, from public
report, the brilliancy of those military services on which it had been
built. That he was likely to prove a formidable opponent, had he
continued in Klosterheim, the Landgrave knew too well; and upon the
advantage over him which he had now gained, though otherwise it should
prove only a temporary one, he determined to found a permanent obstacle
to the emperor's views. As a preliminary step, he prepared to crush all
opposition in Klosterheim; a purpose which was equally important to his
vengeance and his policy.

This system he opened with a series of tyrannical regulations, some of
which gave the more offence that they seemed wholly capricious and
insulting. The students were confined to their college bounds, except
at stated intervals; were subject to a military muster, or calling over
of names, every evening; were required to receive sentinels within the
extensive courts of their own college, and at length a small court of
guard; with numerous other occasional marks, as opportunities offered,
of princely discountenance and anger.

In the university, at that time, from local causes, many young men of
rank and family were collected. Those even who had taken no previous
part in the cause of the Klosterheimers were now roused to a sense of
personal indignity. And as soon as the light was departed, a large body
of them collected at the rooms of Count St. Aldenheim, whose rank
promised a suitable countenance to their purpose, whilst his youth
seemed a pledge for the requisite activity.

The count was a younger brother of the Palsgrave of Birkenfeld, and
maintained a sumptuous establishment in Klosterheim. Whilst the state
of the forest had allowed of hunting, hawking, or other amusements, no
man had exhibited so fine a stud of horses. No man had so large a train
of servants; no man entertained his friends with such magnificent
hospitalities. His generosity, his splendor, his fine person, and the
courtesy with which he relieved the humblest people from the oppression
of his rank, had given him a popularity amongst the students. His
courage had been tried in battle: but, after all, it was doubted
whether he were not of too luxurious a turn to undertake any cause
which called for much exertion; for the death of a rich abbess, who had
left the whole of an immense fortune to the count, as her favorite
nephew, had given him another motive for cultivating peaceful pursuits,
to which few men were, constitutionally, better disposed.

It was the time of day when the count was sure to be found at home with
a joyous party of friends. Magnificent chandeliers shed light upon a
table furnished with every description of costly wines produced in
Europe. According to the custom of the times, these were drunk in cups
of silver or gold; and an opportunity was thus gained, which St.
Aldenheim had not lost, of making a magnificent display of luxury
without ostentation. The ruby wine glittered in the jewelled goblet
which the count had raised to his lips, at the very moment when the
students entered.

"Welcome, friends," said the Count St. Aldenheim, putting down his cup,
"welcome always; but never more than at this hour, when wine and good
fellowship teach us to know the value of our youth."

"Thanks, count, from all of us. But the fellowship we seek at present
must be of another temper; our errand is of business."

"Then, friends, it shall rest until to-morrow. Not for the Papacy, to
which my good aunt would have raised a ladder for me of three steps,--
Abbot, Bishop, Cardinal,--would I renounce the Tokay of to-night for
the business of to-morrow. Come, gentlemen, let us drink my aunt's
health."

"Memory, you would say, count."

"Memory, most learned friend,--you are right. Ah! gentlemen, she was a
woman worthy to be had in remembrance: for she invented a capital
plaster for gunshot wounds; and a jollier old fellow over a bottle of
Tokay there is not at this day in Suabia, or in the Swedish camp. And
that reminds me to ask, gentlemen, have any of you heard that Gustavus
Horn is expected at Falkenberg? Such news is astir; and be sure of
this--that, in such a case, we have cracked crowns to look for. I know
the man. And many a hard night's watching he has cost me; for which, if
you please, gentlemen, we will drink his health."

"But our business, dear count--"

"Shall wait, please God, until to-morrow; for this is the time when man
and beast repose."

"And truly, count, we are like--as you take things--to be numbered with
the last. Fie, Count St. Aldenheim! are you the man that would have us
suffer those things tamely which the Landgrave has begun?"

"And what now hath his serenity been doing? Doth he meditate to abolish
Burgundy? If so, my faith! but we are, as you observe, little above the
brutes. Or, peradventure, will he forbid laughing,--his highness being
little that way given himself?"

"Count St. Aldenheim! it pleases you to jest. But we are assured that
you know as well as we, and relish no better, the insults which the
Landgrave is heaping upon us all. For example, the sentinel at your own
door--doubtless you marked him? How liked you him?--"

"Methought he looked cold and blue. So I sent him a goblet of
Johannisberg."

"You did? and the little court of guard--you have seen _that?_ and
Colonel von Aremberg, how think you of him?"

"Why surely now he's a handsome man: pity he wears so fiery a scarf!
Shall we drink his health, gentlemen?"

"Health to the great fiend first!"

"As you please, gentlemen: it is for you to regulate the precedency.
But at least,

  Here's to my aunt--the jolly old sinner,
  That fasted each day, from breakfast to dinner!
  Saw any man yet such an orthodox fellow,
  In the morning when sober, in the evening when mellow?
        Saw any man yet," etc.

"Count, farewell!" interrupted the leader of the party; and all turned
round indignantly to leave the room.

"Farewell, gentlemen, as you positively will not drink my aunt's
health; though, after all, she was a worthy fellow; and her plaster for
gunshot wounds--"

But with that word the door closed upon the count's farewell words.
Suddenly taking up a hat which lay upon the ground, he exclaimed, "Ah!
behold! one of my friends has left his hat. Truly he may chance to want
it on a frosty night." And, so saying, he hastily rushed after the
party, whom he found already on the steps of the portico. Seizing the
hand of the leader, he whispered,

"Friend! do you know me so little as to apprehend my jesting in a
serious sense? Know that two of those whom you saw on my right hand are
spies of the Landgrave. Their visit to me, I question not, was
purposely made to catch some such discoveries as you, my friends, would
too surely have thrown in their way, but for my determined rattling. At
this time, I must not stay. Come again after midnight--farewell."

And then, in a voice to reach his guests within, he shouted,
"Gentlemen, my aunt, the abbot of Ingelheim,--abbess, I would say,--
held that her spurs were for her heels, and her beaver for her head.
Whereupon, baron, I return you your hat."

Meantime, the two insidious intelligencers of the Landgrave returned to
the palace with discoveries, not so ample as they were on the point of
surprising, but sufficient to earn thanks for themselves, and to guide
the counsels of their master.


CHAPTER VIII.


That same night a full meeting of the most distinguished students was
assembled at the mansion of Count St. Aldenheim. Much stormy discussion
arose upon two points. First, upon the particular means by which they
were to pursue an end upon which all were unanimous. Upon that,
however, they were able for the present to arrive at a preliminary
arrangement with sufficient harmony. This was to repair in a body, with
Count St. Aldenheim at their head, to the castle, and there to demand
an audience of the Landgrave, at which a strong remonstrance was to be
laid before his highness, and their determination avowed to repel the
indignities thrust upon them, with their united forces. On the second
they were more at variance. It happened that many of the persons
present, and amongst them Count St. Aldenheim, were friends of
Maximilian. A few, on the other hand, there were, who, either from
jealousy of his distinguished merit, hated him; or, as good citizens of
Klosterheim, and connected by old family ties with the interests of
that town, were disposed to charge Maximilian with ambitious views of
private aggrandizement, at the expense of the city, grounded upon the
emperor's favor, or upon a supposed marriage with some lady of the
imperial house. For the story of Paulina's and Maximilian's mutual
attachment had transpired through many of the travellers; but with some
circumstances of fiction. In defending Maximilian upon those charges,
his friends had betrayed a natural warmth at the injustice offered to
his character; and the liveliness of the dispute on this point had
nearly ended in a way fatal to their unanimity on the immediate
question at issue. Good sense, however, and indignation at the
Landgrave, finally brought them round again to their first resolution;
and they separated with the unanimous intention of meeting at noon on
the following day, for the purpose of carrying it into effect.

But their unanimity on this point was of little avail; for at an early
hour on the following morning every one of those who had been present
at the meeting was arrested by a file of soldiers, on a charge of
conspiracy, and marched off to one of the city prisons. The Count St.
Aldenheim was himself the sole exception; and this was a distinction
odious to his generous nature, as it drew upon him a cloud of
suspicion. He was sensible that he would be supposed to owe his
privilege to some discovery or act of treachery, more or less, by which
he had merited the favor of the Landgrave. The fact was, that in the
indulgence shown to the count no motive had influenced the Landgrave
but a politic consideration of the great favor and influence which the
count's brother, the Palsgrave, at this moment enjoyed in the camp of
his own Swedish allies. On this principle of policy, the Landgrave
contented himself with placing St. Aldenheim under a slight military
confinement to his own house, under the guard of a few sentinels posted
in his hall.

For _him_, therefore, under the powerful protection which he
enjoyed elsewhere, there was no great anxiety entertained. But for the
rest, many of whom had no friends, or friends who did them the ill
service of enemies, being in fact regarded as enemies by the Landgrave
and his council, serious fears were entertained by the whole city.
Their situation was evidently critical. The Landgrave had them in his
power. He was notoriously a man of gloomy and malignant passions; had
been educated, as all European princes then were, in the notions of a
plenary and despotic right over the lives of his subjects, in any case
where they lifted their presumptuous thoughts to the height of
controlling the sovereign; and, even in circumstances which to his own
judgment might seem to confer much less discretionary power over the
rights of prisoners, he had been suspected of directing the course of
law and of punishment into channels that would not brook the public
knowledge. Darker dealings were imputed to him in the popular opinion.
Gloomy suspicions were muttered at the fireside, which no man dared
openly to avow; and in the present instance the conduct of the
Landgrave was every way fitted to fall in with the worst of the public
fears. At one time he talked of bringing his prisoners to a trial; at
another, he countermanded the preparations which he had made with that
view. Sometimes he spoke of banishing them in a body; and again he
avowed his intention to deal with their crime as treason. The result of
this moody and capricious tyranny was to inspire the most vague and
gloomy apprehensions into the minds of the prisoners, and to keep their
friends, with the whole city of Klosterheim, in a feverish state of
insecurity.

This state of things lasted for nearly three weeks; but at length a
morning of unexpected pleasure dawned upon the city. The prisoners were
in one night all released. In half an hour the news ran over the town
and the university; multitudes hastened to the college, anxious to
congratulate the prisoners on their deliverance from the double
afflictions of a dungeon and of continual insecurity. Mere curiosity
also prompted some, who took but little interest in the prisoners or
their cause, to inquire into the circumstances of so abrupt and
unexpected an act of grace. One principal court in the college was
filled with those who had come upon this errand of friendly interest or
curiosity. Nothing was to be seen but earnest and delighted faces,
offering or acknowledging congratulation; nothing to be heard but the
language of joy and pleasure--friendly or affectionate, according to
the sex or relation of the speaker. Some were talking of procuring
passports for leaving the town; some anticipating that this course
would not be left to their own choice, but imposed, as the price of his
clemency, by the Landgrave. All, in short, was hubbub and joyous
uproar, when suddenly a file of the city guard, commanded by an
officer, made their way rudely and violently through the crowd,
advancing evidently to the spot where the liberated prisoners were
collected in a group. At that moment the Count St. Aldenheim was
offering his congratulations. The friends to whom he spoke were too
confident in his honor and integrity to have felt even one moment's
misgiving upon the true causes which had sheltered him from the
Landgrave's wrath, and had thus given him a privilege so invidious in
the eyes of those who knew him not, and on that account so hateful in
his own. They knew his unimpeachable fidelity to the cause and
themselves, and were anxiously expressing their sense of it by the
warmth of their salutations at the very moment when the city guard
appeared. The count, on his part, was gayly reminding them to come that
evening and fulfil their engagement to drink his aunt of jovial memory
in her own Johannisberg, when the guard, shouldering aside the crowd,
advanced, and, surrounding the group of students, in an instant laid
the hands of summary arrest each upon the gentleman who stood next him.
The petty officer who commanded made a grasp at one of the most
distinguished in dress, and seized rudely upon the gold chain depending
from his neck. St. Aldenheim, who happened at the moment to be in
conversation with this individual, stung with a sudden indignation at
the ruffian eagerness of the men in thus abusing the privileges of
their office, and unable to control the generous ardor of his nature,
met this brutal outrage with a sudden blow at the officer's face,
levelled with so true an aim, that it stretched him at his length upon
the ground. No terrors of impending vengeance, had they been a thousand
times stronger than they were, could at this moment have availed to
stifle the cry of triumphant pleasure--long, loud, and unfaltering--
which indignant sympathy with the oppressed extorted from the crowd.
The pain and humiliation of the blow, exalted into a maddening
intensity by this popular shout of exultation, quickened the officer's
rage into an apparent frenzy. With white lips, and half suffocated with
the sudden revulsion of passion, natural enough to one who had never
before encountered even a momentary overture at opposition to the
authority with which he was armed, and for the first time in his life
found his own brutalities thrown back resolutely in his teeth, the man
rose, and, by signs rather than the inarticulate sounds which he meant
for words, pointed the violence of his party upon the Count St.
Aldenheim. With halberds bristling around him, the gallant young
nobleman was loudly summoned to surrender; but he protested
indignantly, drawing his sword and placing himself in an attitude of
defence, that he would die a thousand deaths sooner than surrender the
sword of his father, the Palsgrave, a prince of the empire, of
unspotted honor, and most ancient descent, into the hands of a jailer.

"Jailer!" exclaimed the officer, almost howling with passion.

"Why, then, captain of jailers, lieutenant, anspessade, or what you
will. What else than a jailer is he that sits watch upon the prison-
doors of honorable cavaliers?" Another shout of triumph applauded St.
Aldenheim; for the men who discharged the duties of the city guard at
that day, or "petty guard," as it was termed, corresponding in many of
their functions to the modern police, were viewed with contempt by all
parties; and most of all by the military, though in some respects
assimilated to them by discipline and costume. They were industriously
stigmatized as jailers; for which there was the more ground, as their
duties did in reality associate them pretty often with the jailer; and
in other respects they were a dissolute and ferocious body of men,
gathered not out of the citizens, but many foreign deserters, or
wretched runagates from the jail, or from the justice of the provost-
marshal in some distant camp. Not a man, probably, but was liable to be
reclaimed, in some or other quarter of Germany, as a capital
delinquent. Sometimes, even, they were actually detected, claimed, and
given up to the pursuit of justice, when it happened that the subjects
of their criminal acts were weighty enough to sustain an energetic
inquiry. Hence their reputation became worse than scandalous: the
mingled infamy of their calling, and the houseless condition of
wretchedness which had made it worth their acceptance, combined to
overwhelm them with public scorn; and this public abhorrence, which at
any rate awaited them, mere desperation led them too often to
countenance and justify by their conduct.

"Captain of jailers! do your worst, I say," again ejaculated St.
Aldenheim. Spite of his blinding passion, the officer hesitated to
precipitate himself into a personal struggle with the count, and thus,
perhaps, afford his antagonist an occasion for a further triumph. But
loudly and fiercely he urged on his followers to attack him. These
again, not partaking in the personal wrath of their leader, even whilst
pressing more and more closely upon St. Aldenheim, and calling upon him
to surrender, scrupled to inflict a wound, or too marked an outrage,
upon a cavalier whose rank was known to the whole city, and of late
most advantageously known for his own interests, by the conspicuous
immunity which it had procured him from the Landgrave. In vain did the
commanding officer insist, in vain did the count defy; menaces from
neither side availed to urge the guard into any outrage upon the person
of one who might have it in his power to retaliate so severely upon
themselves. They continued obstinately at a stand, simply preventing
his escape, when suddenly the tread of horses' feet arose upon the ear,
and through a long vista were discovered a body of cavalry from the
castle coming up at a charging pace to the main entrance of the
college. Without pulling up on the outside, as hitherto they had always
done, they expressed sufficiently the altered tone of the Landgrave's
feelings towards the old chartered interests of Klosterheim, by
plunging through the great archway of the college-gates; and then
making way at the same furious pace through the assembled crowds, who
broke rapidly away to the right and to the left, they reined up
directly abreast of the city guard and their prisoners.

"Colonel von Aremberg!" said St. Aldenheim, "I perceive your errand. To
a soldier I surrender myself; to this tyrant of dungeons, who has
betrayed more men, and cheated more gibbets of their due, than ever he
said _aves_, I will never lend an ear, though he should bear the
orders of every Landgrave in Germany."

"You do well," replied the colonel; "but for this man, count, he bears
no orders from any Landgrave, nor will ever again bear orders from the
Landgrave of X----. Gentlemen, you are all my prisoners; and you will
accompany me to the castle. Count St. Aldenheim, I am sorry that there
is no longer an exemption for yourself. Please to advance. If it will
be any gratification to you, these men" (pointing to the city guard)
"are prisoners also."

Here was a revolution of fortune that confounded everybody. The
detested guardians of the city jail were themselves to tenant it; or,
by a worse fate still, were to be consigned unpitied, and their case
unjudged, to the dark and pestilent dungeons which lay below the
Landgrave's castle. A few scattered cries of triumph were heard from
the crowd; but they were drowned in a tumult of conflicting feelings.
As human creatures, fallen under the displeasure of a despot with a
judicial power of torture to enforce his investigations, even
_they_ claimed some compassion. But there arose, to call off
attention from these less dignified objects of the public interest, a
long train of gallant cavaliers, restored so capriciously to liberty,
in order, as it seemed, to give the greater poignancy and bitterness to
the instant renewal of their captivity. This was the very frenzy of
despotism in its very moodiest state of excitement. Many began to think
the Landgrave mad. If so, what a dreadful fate might be anticipated for
the sons or representatives of so many noble families, gallant soldiers
the greater part of them, with a nobleman of princely blood at their
head, lying under the displeasure of a gloomy and infuriated tyrant,
with unlimited means of executing the bloodiest suggestions of his
vengeance. Then, in what way had the guardians of the jails come to be
connected with any even imaginary offence? Supposing the Landgrave
insane, his agents were not so; Colonel von Aremberg was a man of
shrewd and penetrating understanding; and this officer had clearly
spoken in the tone of one who, whilst announcing the sentence of
another, sympathizes entirely with the justice and necessity of its
harshness.

Something dropped from the miserable leader of the city guard, in his
first confusion and attempt at self-defence, which rather increased
than explained the mystery. "The Masque! the Masque !" This was the
word which fell at intervals upon the ear of the listening crowd, as he
sometimes directed his words in the way of apology and deprecation to
Colonel von Aremberg, who did not vouchsafe to listen, or of occasional
explanation and discussion, as it was partly kept up between himself
and one of his nearest partners in the imputed transgression. Two or
three there might be seen in the crowd, whose looks avowed some nearer
acquaintance with this mysterious allusion than it would have been safe
to acknowledge. But, for the great body of spectators who accompanied
the prisoners and their escort to the gates of the castle, it was
pretty evident by their inquiring looks, and the fixed expression of
wonder upon their features, that the whole affair, and its
circumstances, were to them equally a subject of mystery for what was
past, and of blind terror for what was to come.


CHAPTER IX.


The cavalcade, with its charge of prisoners, and its attendant train of
spectators, halted at the gates of the _schloss_. This vast and
antique pile had now come to be surveyed with dismal and revolting
feelings, as the abode of a sanguinary despot. The dungeons and
labyrinths of its tortuous passages, its gloomy halls of audience, with
the vast corridors which surmounted the innumerable flights of stairs--
some noble, spacious, and in the Venetian taste, capable of admitting
the march of an army--some spiral, steep, and so unusually narrow as to
exclude two persons walking abreast; these, together with the numerous
chapels erected in it to different saints by devotees, male or female,
in the families of forgotten Landgraves through four centuries back;
and, finally, the tribunals, or _gericht-kammern_, for dispensing
justice, criminal or civil, to the city and territorial dependencies of
Klosterheim; all united to compose a body of impressive images,
hallowed by great historical remembrances, or traditional stories, that
from infancy to age dwelt upon the feelings of the Klosterheimers.
Terror and superstitious dread predominated undoubtedly in the total
impression; but the gentle virtues exhibited by a series of princes,
who had made this their favorite residence, naturally enough terminated
in mellowing the sternness of such associations into a religious awe,
not without its own peculiar attractions. But, at present, under the
harsh and repulsive character of the reigning prince, everything took a
new color from his un-genial habits. The superstitious legend, which
had so immemorially peopled the _schloss_ with spectral
apparitions, now revived in its earliest strength. Never was Germany
more dedicated to superstition in every shape than at this period. The
wild, tumultuous times, and the slight tenure upon which all men held
their lives, naturally threw their thoughts much upon the other world;
and communications with that, or its burthen of secrets, by every
variety of agencies, ghosts, divination, natural magic, palmistry, or
astrology, found in every city of the land more encouragement than
ever.

It cannot, therefore, be surprising that the well-known apparition of
the White Lady (a legend which affected Klosterheim through the
fortunes of its Landgraves, no less than several other princely houses
of Germany, descended from the same original stock) should about this
time have been seen in the dusk of the evening at some of the upper
windows in the castle, and once in a lofty gallery of the great chapel
during the vesper service. This lady, generally known by the name of
the White Lady Agnes, or Lady Agnes of Weissemburg, is supposed to have
lived in the thirteenth or fourteenth century, and from that time, even
to our own days, the current belief is, that on the eve of any great
crisis of good or evil fortune impending over the three or four
illustrious houses of Germany which trace their origin from her, she
makes her appearance in some conspicuous apartment, great baronial hall
or chapel, of their several palaces, sweeping along in white robes, and
a voluminous train. Her appearance of late in the _schloss_ of
Klosterheim, confidently believed by the great body of the people, was
hailed with secret pleasure, as forerunning some great change in the
Landgrave's family,--which was but another name for better days to
themselves, whilst of necessity it menaced some great evil to the
prince himself. Hope, therefore, was predominant in their prospects,
and in the supernatural intimations of coming changes;--yet awe and
deep religious feeling mingled with their hope. Of chastisement
approaching to the Landgrave they felt assured. Some dim religious
judgment, like that which brooded over the house of dipus, was now at
hand,--that was the universal impression. His gloomy asceticism of life
seemed to argue secret crimes: these were to be brought to light; for
these, and for his recent tyranny, prosperous as it had seemed for a
moment, chastisements were now impending; and something of the awe
which belonged to a prince so marked out for doom and fatal catastrophe
seemed to attach itself to his mansion, more especially as it was there
only that the signs and portents of the coming woe had revealed
themselves in the apparition of the White Lady.

Under this superstitious impression, many of the spectators paused at
the entrance of the castle, and lingered in the portal, though
presuming that the chamber of justice, according to the frank old usage
of Germany, was still open to all comers. Of this notion they were
speedily disabused by the sudden retreat of the few who had penetrated
into the first ante-chamber. These persons were harshly repelled in a
contumelious manner, and read to the astonished citizens another lesson
upon the new arts of darkness and concealment with which the Landgrave
found it necessary to accompany his new acts of tyranny.

Von Aremberg and his prisoners, thus left alone in one of the ante-
chambers, waited no long time before they were summoned to the presence
of the Landgrave.

After pacing along a number of corridors, all carpeted so as to return
no sound to their footsteps, they arrived in a little hall, from which
a door suddenly opened, upon a noiseless signal exchanged with an usher
outside, and displayed before them a long gallery, with a table and a
few seats arranged at the further end. Two gentlemen were seated at the
table, anxiously examining papers; in one of whom it was easy to
recognize the wily glance of the Italian minister; the other was the
Landgrave.

This prince was now on the verge of fifty, strikingly handsome in his
features, and of imposing presence, from the union of a fine person
with manners unusually dignified. No man understood better the art of
restraining his least governable impulses of anger or malignity within
the decorums of his rank. And even his worst passions, throwing a
gloomy rather than terrific air upon his features, served less to alarm
and revolt, than to impress the sense of secret distrust. Of late,
indeed, from the too evident indications of the public hatred, his
sallies of passion had become wilder and more ferocious, and his self-
command less habitually conspicuous. But, in general, a gravity of
insidious courtesy disguised from all but penetrating eyes the
treacherous purpose of his heart.

The Landgrave bowed to the Count St. Aldenheim, and, pointing to a
chair, begged him to understand that he wished to do nothing
inconsistent with his regard for the Palsgrave his brother; and would
be content with his parole of honor to pursue no further any conspiracy
against himself, in which he might too thoughtlessly have engaged, and
with his retirement from the city of Klosterheim.

The Count St. Aldenheim replied that he and all the other cavaliers
present, according to his belief, stood upon the same footing: that
they had harbored no thought of conspiracy, unless that name could
attach to a purpose of open expostulation with his highness on the
outraged privileges of their corporation as a university; that he
wished not for any distinction of treatment in a case when all were
equal offenders, or none at all; and, finally, that he believed the
sentence of exile from Klosterheim would be cheerfully accepted by all
or most of those present.

Adorni, the minister, shook his head, and glanced significantly at the
Landgrave, during this answer. The Landgrave coldly replied that if he
could suppose the count to speak sincerely, it was evident that he was
little aware to what length his companions, or some of them, had pushed
their plots. "Here are the proofs!" and he pointed to the papers.

"And now, gentlemen," said he, turning to the students, "I marvel that
you, being cavaliers of family, and doubtless holding yourselves men of
honor, should beguile these poor knaves into certain ruin, whilst
yourselves could reap nothing but a brief mockery of the authority
which you could not hope to evade."

Thus called upon, the students and the city guard told their tale; in
which no contradictions could be detected. The city prison was not
particularly well secured against attacks from without. To prevent,
therefore, any sudden attempt at a rescue, the guard kept watch by
turns. One man watched two hours, traversing the different passages of
the prison; and was then relieved. At three o'clock on the preceding
night, pacing a winding lobby, brightly illuminated, the man who kept
that watch was suddenly met by a person wearing a masque, and armed at
all points. His surprise and consternation were great, and the more so
as the steps of The Masque were soundless, though the floor was a stone
one. The guard, but slightly prepared to meet an attack, would,
however, have resisted or raised an alarm; but The Masque, instantly
levelling a pistol at his head with one hand, with the other had thrown
open the door of an empty cell, indicating to the man by signs that he
must enter it. With this intimation he had necessarily complied; and
The Masque had immediately turned the key upon him. Of what followed he
knew nothing until aroused by his comrades setting him at liberty,
after some time had been wasted in searching for him.

The students had a pretty uniform tale to report. A Masque, armed cap-
a-pie, as described by the guard, had visited each of their cells in
succession; had instructed them by signs to dress, and then, pointing
to the door, by a series of directions all communicated in the same
dumb show, had assembled them together, thrown open the prison door,
and, pointing to their college, had motioned them thither. This motion
they had seen no cause to disobey, presuming their dismissal to be
according to the mode which best pleased his highness; and not ill-
pleased at finding so peaceful a termination to a summons which at
first, from its mysterious shape and the solemn hour of night, they had
understood as tending to some more formidable issue.

It was observed that neither the Landgrave nor his minister treated
this report of so strange a transaction with the scorn which had been
anticipated. Both listened attentively, and made minute inquiries as to
every circumstance of the dress and appointments of the mysterious
Masque. What was his height? By what road, or in what direction, had he
disappeared? These questions answered, his highness and his minister
consulted a few minutes together; and then, turning to Von Aremberg,
bade him for the present dismiss the prisoners to their homes; an act
of grace which seemed likely to do him service at the present crisis;
but at the same time to take sufficient security for their
reappearance. This done, the whole body were liberated.


CHAPTER X.


All Klosterheim was confounded by the story of the mysterious Masque.
For the story had been rapidly dispersed; and on the same day it was
made known in another shape. A notice was affixed to the walls of
several public places in these words:

"Landgrave, beware! henceforth not you, but I, govern in Klosterheim.

(Signed) THE MASQUE."

And this was no empty threat. Very soon it became apparent that some
mysterious agency was really at work to counteract the Landgrave's
designs. Sentinels were carried off from solitary posts. Guards, even
of a dozen men, were silently trepanned from their stations. By and by,
other attacks were made, even more alarming, upon domestic security.
Was there a burgomaster amongst the citizens who had made himself
conspicuously a tool of the Landgrave, or had opposed the imperial
interest? He was carried off in the night-time from his house, and
probably from the city. At first this was an easy task. Nobody
apprehending any special danger to himself, no special preparations
were made to meet it. But as it soon became apparent in what cause The
Masque was moving, every person who knew himself obnoxious to attack,
took means to face it. Guards were multiplied; arms were repaired in
every house; alarm-bells were hung. For a time the danger seemed to
diminish. The attacks were no longer so frequent. Still, wherever they
were attempted, they succeeded just as before. It seemed, in fact, that
all the precautions taken had no other effect than to warn The Masque
of his own danger, and to place him more vigilantly on his guard. Aware
of new defences raising, it seemed that he waited to see the course
they would take; once master of that, he was ready (as it appeared) to
contend with them as successfully as before.

Nothing could exceed the consternation of the city. Those even who did
not fall within the apparent rule which governed the attacks of The
Masque felt a sense of indefinite terror hanging over them. Sleep was
no longer safe; the seclusion of a man's private hearth, the secrecy of
bed-rooms, was no longer a protection. Locks gave way, bars fell, doors
flew open, as if by magic, before him. Arms seemed useless. In some
instances a party of as many as ten or a dozen persons had been removed
without rousing disturbance in the neighborhood. Nor was this the only
circumstance of mystery. Whither he could remove his victims was even
more incomprehensible than the means by which he succeeded. All was
darkness and fear; and the whole city was agitated with panic.

It began now to be suggested that a nightly guard should be
established, having fixed stations or points of rendezvous, and at
intervals parading the streets. This was cheerfully assented to; for,
after the first week of the mysterious attacks, it began to be observed
that the imperial party were attacked indiscriminately with the
Swedish. Many students publicly declared that they had been dogged
through a street or two by an armed Masque; others had been suddenly
confronted by him in unfrequented parts of the city, in the dead of
night, and were on the point of being attacked, when some alarm, or the
approach of distant footsteps, had caused him to disappear. The
students, indeed, more particularly, seemed objects of attack; and as
they were pretty generally attached to the imperial interest, the
motives of The Masque were no longer judged to be political. Hence it
happened that the students came forward in a body, and volunteered as
members of the nightly guard. Being young, military for the most part
in their habits, and trained to support the hardships of night-
watching, they seemed peculiarly fitted for the service; and, as the
case was no longer of a nature to awaken the suspicions of the
Landgrave, they were generally accepted and enrolled; and with the more
readiness, as the known friends of that prince came forward at the same
time.

A night-watch was thus established, which promised security to the
city, and a respite from their mysterious alarms. It was distributed
into eight or ten divisions, posted at different points, whilst a
central one traversed the whole city at stated periods, and overlooked
the local stations. Such an arrangement was wholly unknown at that time
in every part of Germany, and was hailed with general applause.

To the astonishment, however, of everybody, it proved wholly
ineffectual. Houses were entered as before; the college chambers proved
no sanctuary; indeed, they were attacked with a peculiar obstinacy,
which was understood to express a spirit of retaliation for the
alacrity of the students in combining--for the public protection.
People were carried off as before. And continual notices affixed to the
gates of the college, the convents, or the _schloss_, with the
signature of _The Masque_, announced to the public his determination
to persist, and his contempt of the measures organized against him.

The alarm of the citizens now became greater than ever. The danger was
one which courage could not face, nor prudence make provision for, nor
wiliness evade. All alike, who had once been marked out for attack,
sooner or later fell victims to the obstinacy of this mysterious foe.
To have received even an individual warning, availed them not at all.
Sometimes it happened that, having received notice of suspicious
circumstances indicating that The Masque had turned his attention upon
themselves, they would assemble round their dwellings, or in their very
chambers, a band of armed men sufficient to set the danger at defiance.
But no sooner had they relaxed in these costly and troublesome
arrangements, no sooner was the sense of peril lulled, and an opening
made for their unrelenting enemy, than he glided in with his customary
success; and in a morning or two after, it was announced to the city
that they also were numbered with his victims.

Even yet it seemed that something remained in reserve to augment the
terrors of the citizens, and push them to excess. Hitherto there had
been no reason to think that any murderous violence had occurred in the
mysterious rencontres between The Masque and his victims. But of late,
in those houses, or college chambers, from which the occupiers had
disappeared, traces of bloodshed were apparent in some instances, and
of ferocious conflict in others. Sometimes a profusion of hair was
scattered on the ground; sometimes fragments of dress, or splinters of
weapons. Everything marked that on both sides, as this mysterious
agency advanced, the passions increased in intensity; determination and
murderous malignity on the one side, and the fury of resistance on the
other.

At length the last consummation was given to the public panic; for, as
if expressly to put an end to all doubts upon the spirit in which he
conducted his warfare, in one house, where the bloodshed had been so
great as to argue some considerable loss of life, a notice was left
behind in the following terms: "Thus it is that I punish resistance;
mercy to a cheerful submission; but henceforth death to the obstinate!
--THE MASQUE."

What was to be done? Some counselled a public deprecation of his wrath,
addressed to The Masque. But this, had it even offered any chance of
succeeding, seemed too abject an act of abasement to become a large
city. Under any circumstances, it was too humiliating a confession
that, in a struggle with one man (for no more had avowedly appeared
upon the scene), they were left defeated and at his mercy. A second
party counselled a treaty; would it not be possible to learn the
ultimate objects of The Masque; and, if such as seemed capable of being
entertained with honor, to concede to him his demands, in exchange for
security to the city, and immunity from future molestation? It was true
that no man knew where to seek him: personally he was hidden from their
reach; but everybody knew how to find him: he was amongst them; in
their very centre; and whatever they might address to him in a public
notice would be sure of speedily reaching his eye.

After some deliberation, a summons was addressed to The Masque, and
exposed on the college gates, demanding of him a declaration of his
purposes, and the price which he expected for suspending them. The next
day an answer appeared in the same situation, avowing the intention of
The Masque to come forward with ample explanation of his motives at a
proper crisis, till which, "more blood must flow in Klosterheim."


CHAPTER XI.


Meantime the Landgrave was himself perplexed and alarmed. Hitherto he
had believed himself possessed of all the intrigues, plots, or
conspiracies, which threatened his influence in the city. Among the
students and among the citizens he had many spies, who communicated to
him whatsoever they could learn, which was sometimes more than the
truth, and sometimes a good deal less. But now he was met by a terrific
antagonist, who moved in darkness, careless of his power, inaccessible
to his threats, and apparently as reckless as himself of the quality of
his means.

Adorni, with all his Venetian subtlety, was now as much at fault as
everybody else. In vain had they deliberated together, day after day,
upon his probable purposes; in vain had they schemed to intercept his
person, or offered high rewards for tracing his retreats. Snares had
been laid for him in vain; every wile had proved abortive, every plot
had been counterplotted. And both involuntarily confessed that they had
now met with their master.

Vexed and confounded, fears for the future struggling with
mortification for the past, the Landgrave was sitting, late at night,
in the long gallery where he usually held his councils. He was
reflecting with anxiety on the peculiarly unpropitious moment at which
his new enemy had come upon the stage; the very crisis of the struggle
between the Swedish and imperial interest in Klosterheim, which would
ultimately determine his own place and value in the estimate of his new
allies. He was not of a character to be easily duped by mystery. Yet he
could not but acknowledge to himself that there was something
calculated to impress awe, and the sort of fear which is connected with
the supernatural, in the sudden appearances, and vanishings as sudden,
of The Masque. He came, no one could guess whence; retreated, no one
could guess whither; was intercepted, and yet eluded arrest; and if
half the stories in circulation could be credited, seemed inaudible in
his steps, at pleasure to make himself invisible and impalpable to the
very hands stretched out to detain him. Much of this, no doubt, was
wilful exaggeration, or the fictions of fears self-deluded. But enough
remained, after every allowance, to justify an extraordinary interest
in so singular a being; and the Landgrave could not avoid wishing that
chance might offer an opportunity to himself of observing him.

Profound silence had for some time reigned throughout the castle. A
clock which stood in the room broke it for a moment by striking the
quarters; and, raising his eyes, the Landgrave perceived that it was
past two. He rose to retire for the night, and stood for a moment
musing with one hand resting upon the table. A momentary feeling of awe
came across him, as his eyes travelled through the gloom at the lower
end of the room, on the sudden thought, that a being so mysterious, and
capable of piercing through so many impediments to the interior of
every mansion in Klosterheim, was doubtless likely enough to visit the
castle; nay, it would be no ways improbable that he should penetrate to
this very room. What bars had yet been found sufficient to repel him?
And who could pretend to calculate the hour of his visit? This night
even might be the time which he would select. Thinking thus, the
Landgrave was suddenly aware of a dusky figure entering the room by a
door at the lower end. The room had the length and general proportions
of a gallery, and the further end was so remote from the candles which
stood on the Landgrave's table, that the deep gloom was but slightly
penetrated by their rays. Light, however, there was, sufficient to
display the outline of a figure slowly and inaudibly advancing up the
room. It could not be said that the figure advanced stealthily; on the
contrary, its motion, carriage, and bearing, were in the highest degree
dignified and solemn. But the feeling of a stealthy purpose was
suggested by the perfect silence of its tread. The motion of a shadow
could not be more noiseless. And this circumstance confirmed the
Landgrave's first impression, that now he was on the point of
accomplishing his recent wish, and meeting that mysterious being who
was the object of so much awe, and the author of so far-spread a panic.

He was right; it was indeed The Masque, armed cap-a-pie as usual. He
advanced with an equable and determined step in the direction of the
Landgrave. Whether he saw his highness, who stood a little in the shade
of a large cabinet, could not be known; the Landgrave doubted not that
he did. He was a prince of firm nerves by constitution, and of great
intrepidity; yet, as one who shared in the superstitions of his age, he
could not be expected entirely to suppress an emotion of indefinite
apprehension as he now beheld the solemn approach of a being, who, by
some unaccountable means, had trepanned so many different individuals
from so many different houses, most of them prepared for self-defence,
and fenced in by the protection of stone walls, locks, and bars.

The Landgrave, however, lost none of his presence of mind; and, in the
midst of his discomposure, as his eye fell upon the habiliments of this
mysterious person, and the arms and military accoutrements which he
bore, naturally his thoughts settled upon the more earthly means of
annoyance which this martial apparition carried about him. The
Landgrave was himself unarmed; he had no arms even within reach, nor
was it possible for him in his present situation very speedily to
summon assistance. With these thoughts passing rapidly through his
mind, and sensible that, in any view of his nature and powers, the
being now in his presence was a very formidable antagonist, the
Landgrave could not but feel relieved from a burden of anxious tremors,
when he saw The Masque suddenly turn towards a door which opened about
half-way up the room, and led into a picture-gallery at right angles
with the room in which they both were.

Into the picture-gallery The Masque passed at the same solemn pace,
without apparently looking at the Landgrave. This movement seemed to
argue, either that he purposely declined an interview with the
prince,--and _that_ might argue fear,--or that he had not been aware of
his presence. Either supposition, as implying something of human
infirmity, seemed incompatible with supernatural faculties. Partly upon
this consideration, and partly, perhaps, because he suddenly
recollected that the road taken by The Masque would lead him directly
past the apartments of the old seneschal, where assistance might be
summoned, the Landgrave found his spirits at this moment revive. The
consciousness of rank and birth also came to his aid, and that sort of
disdain of the aggressor, which possesses every man, brave or cowardly
alike, within the walls of his own dwelling. Unarmed as he was, he
determined to pursue, and perhaps to speak.

The restraints of high breeding, and the ceremonious decorum of his
rank, involuntarily checked the Landgrave from pursuing with a hurried
pace. He advanced with his habitual gravity of step, so that The Masque
was half-way down the gallery before the prince entered it. This
gallery, furnished on each side with pictures, of which some were
portraits, was of great length. The Masque and the prince continued to
advance, preserving a pretty equal distance. It did not appear by any
sign or gesture that The Masque was aware of the Landgrave's pursuit.
Suddenly, however, he paused, drew his sword, halted; the Landgrave
also halted; then, turning half round, and waving with his hand to the
prince so as to solicit his attention, slowly The Masque elevated the
point of his sword to the level of a picture--it was the portrait of a
young cavalier in a hunting-dress, blooming with youth and youthful
energy. The Landgrave turned pale, trembled, and was ruefully agitated.
The Masque kept his sword in its position for half a minute; then
dropping it, shook his head, and raised his hand with a peculiar
solemnity of expression. The Landgrave recovered himself, his features
swelled with passion, he quickened his step, and again followed in
pursuit.

The Masque, however, had by this time turned out of the gallery into a
passage, which, after a single curve, terminated in the private room of
the seneschal. Believing that his ignorance of the localities was thus
leading him on to certain capture, the Landgrave pursued more
leisurely. The passage was dimly lighted; every image floated in a
cloudy obscurity; and, upon reaching the curve, it seemed to the
Landgrave that The Masque was just on the point of entering the
seneschal's room. No other door was heard to open; and he felt assured
that he had seen the lofty figure of The Masque gliding into that
apartment. He again quickened his steps; a light burned within, the
door stood ajar; quietly the prince pushed it open, and entered with
the fullest assurance that he should here at length overtake the object
of his pursuit.

Great was his consternation upon finding in a room, which presented no
outlet, not a living creature except the elderly seneschal, who lay
quietly sleeping in his arm-chair. The first impulse of the prince was
to awaken him roughly, that he might summon aid and cooperate in the
search. One glance at a paper upon the table arrested his hand. He saw
a name written there, interesting to his fears beyond all others in the
world. His eye was riveted as by fascination to the paper. He read one
instant. That satisfied him that the old seneschal must be overcome by
no counterfeit slumbers, when he could thus surrender a secret of
capital importance to the gaze of that eye from which, above all
others, he must desire to screen it. One moment he deliberated with
himself; the old man stirred, and muttered in his dreams; the Landgrave
seized the paper, and stood irresolute for an instant whether to await
his wakening, and authoritatively to claim what so nearly concerned his
own interest, or to retreat with it from the room before the old man
should be aware of the prince's visit, or his own loss.

But the seneschal, wearied perhaps with some unusual exertion, had but
moved in his chair; again he composed himself to deep slumber, made
deeper by the warmth of a hot fire. The raving of the wind, as it
whistled round this angle of the _schloss_, drowned all sounds
that could have disturbed him. The Landgrave secreted the paper; nor
did any sense of his rank and character interpose to check him in an
act so unworthy of an honorable cavalier. Whatever crimes he had
hitherto committed or authorized, this was, perhaps, the first instance
in which he had offended by an instance of petty knavery. He retired
with the stealthy pace of a robber, anxious to evade detection, and
stole back to his own apartments with an overpowering interest in the
discovery he had made so accidentally, and with an anxiety to
investigate it further, which absorbed for the time all other cares,
and banished from his thoughts even The Masque himself, whose sudden
appearance and retreat had, in fact, thrown into his hands the secret
which now so exclusively disturbed him.


CHAPTER XII.


Meantime, The Masque continued to harass the Landgrave, to baffle many
of his wiles, and to neutralize his most politic schemes. In one of the
many placards which he affixed to the castle gates, he described the
Landgrave as ruling in Klosterheim by day, and himself by night.
Sarcasms such as these, together with the practical insults which The
Masque continually offered to the Landgrave, by foiling his avowed
designs, embittered the prince's existence. The injury done to his
political schemes of ambition at this particular crisis was
irreparable. One after one, all the agents and tools by whom he could
hope to work upon the counsels of the Klosterheim authorities had been
removed. Losing _their_ influence, he had lost every prop of his
own. Nor was this all; he was reproached by the general voice of the
city as the original cause of a calamity which he had since shown
himself impotent to redress. He it was, and his cause, which had drawn
upon the people so fatally trepanned the hostility of the mysterious
Masque. But for his highness, all the burgomasters, captains, city-
officers, &c., would now be sleeping in their beds; whereas, the best
late which could be surmised for the most of them was, that they were
sleeping in dungeons; some, perhaps, in their graves. And thus the
Landgrave's cause not merely lost its most efficient partisans, but,
through their loss, determined the wavering against him, alienated the
few who remained of his own faction, and gave strength and
encouragement to the general dissatisfaction which had so long
prevailed.

Thus it happened that the conspirators, or suspected conspirators,
could not be brought to trial, or to punishment without a trial. Any
spark of fresh irritation falling upon the present combustible temper
of the populace, would not fail to produce an explosion. Fresh
conspirators, and real ones, were thus encouraged to arise. The
university, the city, teemed with plots. The government of the prince
was exhausted with the growing labor of tracing and counteracting them.
And, by little and little, matters came into such a condition, that the
control of the city, though still continuing in the Landgrave's hands,
was maintained by mere martial force, and at the very point of the
sword. And, in no long time, it was feared, that with so general a
principle of hatred to combine the populace, and so large a body of
military students to head them, the balance of power, already
approaching to an equipoise, would be turned against the Landgrave's
government. And, in the best event, his highness could now look for
nothing from their love. All might be reckoned for lost that could not
be extorted by force.

This state of things had been brought about by the dreadful Masque,
seconded, no doubt, by those whom he had emboldened and aroused within;
and, as the climax and crowning injury of the whole, every day unfolded
more and more the vast importance which Klosterheim would soon possess
as the centre and key of the movements to be anticipated in the coming
campaign. An electoral cap would perhaps reward the services of the
Landgrave in the general pacification, if he could present himself at
the German Diet as the possessor _de facto_ of Klosterheim and her
territorial dependences, and with some imperfect possession _de
jure_; still more, if he could plead the merit of having brought
over this state, so important from local situation, as a willing ally
to the Swedish interest. But to this a free vote of the city was an
essential preliminary; and from that, through the machinations of The
Masque, he was now further than ever.

The temper of the prince began to give way under these accumulated
provocations. An enemy forever aiming his blows with the deadliest
effect; forever stabbing in the dark, yet charmed and consecrated from
all retaliation; always met with, never to be found! The Landgrave
ground his teeth, clenched his fists, with spasms of fury. lie
quarrelled with his ministers; swore at the officers; cursed the
sentinels; and the story went through Klosterheim that he had kicked
Adorni.

Certain it was, under whatever stimulus, that Adorni put forth much
more zeal at last for the apprehension of The Masque. Come what would,
he publicly avowed that six days more should not elapse without the
arrest of this "ruler of Klosterheim by night." He had a scheme for the
purpose, a plot baited for snaring him; and he pledged his reputation
as a minister and an intriguer upon its entire success.

On the following day, invitations were issued by Adorni, in his
highness' name, to a masqued ball on that day week. The fashion of
masqued entertainments had been recently introduced from Italy into
this sequestered nook of Germany; and here, as there, it had been
abused to purposes of criminal intrigue.

Spite of the extreme unpopularity of the Landgrave with the low and
middle classes of the city, among the highest his little court still
continued to furnish a central resort to the rank and high blood
converged in such unusual proportion within the walls of Klosterheim.
The _schloss_ was still looked to as the standard and final court
of appeal in all matters of taste, elegance, and high breeding. Hence
it naturally happened that everybody with any claims to such an honor
was anxious to receive a ticket of admission;--it became the test for
ascertaining a person's pretensions to mix in the first circles of
society; and with this extraordinary zeal for obtaining an admission
naturally increased the minister's rigor and fastidiousness in pressing
the usual investigation of the claimant's qualifications. Much offence
was given on both sides, and many sneers hazarded at the minister
himself, whose pretensions were supposed to be of the lowest
description. But the result was, that exactly twelve hundred cards were
issued; these were regularly numbered, and below the device, engraved
upon the card, was impressed a seal, bearing the arms and motto of the
Landgraves of X.

Every precaution was taken for carrying into effect the scheme, with
all its details, as concerted by Adorni; and the third day of the
following week was announced as the day of the expected _fęte_.


CHAPTER XIII.


The morning of the important day at length arrived, and all Klosterheim
was filled with expectation. Even those who were not amongst the
invited shared in the anxiety; for a great scene was looked for, and
perhaps some tragical explosion. The undertaking of Adorni was known;
it had been published abroad that he was solemnly pledged to effect the
arrest of The Masque; and by many it was believed that he would so far
succeed, at the least, as to bring on a public collision with that
extraordinary personage. As to the issue most people were doubtful, The
Masque having hitherto so uniformly defeated the best-laid schemes for
his apprehension. But it was hardly questioned that the public
challenge offered to him by Adorni would succeed in bringing him before
the public eye. This challenge had taken the shape of a public notice,
posted up in the places where The Masque had usually affixed his own;
and it was to the following effect: "That the noble strangers now in
Klosterheim, and others invited to the Landgrave's _fęte_, who might
otherwise feel anxiety in presenting themselves at the _schloss_, from
an apprehension of meeting with the criminal disturber of the public
peace, known by the appellation of The Masque, were requested by
authority to lay aside all apprehensions of that nature, as the most
energetic measures had been adopted to prevent or chastise upon the
spot any such insufferable intrusion; and for The Masque himself, if he
presumed to disturb the company by his presence, he would be seized
where he stood, and, without further inquiry, committed to the provost-
marshal for instant execution;--on which account, all persons were
warned carefully to forbear from intrusions of simple curiosity, since
in the hurry of the moment it might be difficult to make the requisite
distinctions."

It was anticipated that this insulting notice would not long go without
an answer from The Masque. Accordingly, on the following morning, a
placard, equally conspicuous, was posted up in the same public places,
side by side with that to which it replied. It was couched in the
following terms: "That he who ruled by night in Klosterheim could not
suppose himself to be excluded from a nocturnal _fete_ given by
any person in that city. That he must be allowed to believe himself
invited by the prince, and would certainly have the honor to accept his
highness' obliging summons. With regard to the low personalities
addressed to himself, that he could not descend to notice anything of
that nature, coming from a man so abject as Adorni, until he should
first have cleared himself from the imputation of having been a tailor
in Venice at the time of the Spanish conspiracy in 1618, and banished
from that city, not for any suspicions that could have settled upon him
and his eight journeymen as making up one conspirator, but on account
of some professional tricks in making a doublet for the Doge. For the
rest, he repeated that he would not fail to meet the Landgrave and his
honorable company."

All Klosterheim laughed at this public mortification offered to
Adorni's pride; for that minister had incurred the public dislike as a
foreigner, and their hatred on the score of private character. Adorni
himself foamed at the mouth with rage, impotent for the present, but
which he prepared to give deadly effect to at the proper time. But,
whilst it laughed, Klosterheim also trembled. Some persons, indeed,
were of opinion that the answer of The Masque was a mere sportive
effusion of malice or pleasantry from the students, who had suffered so
much by his annoyances. But the majority, amongst whom was Adorni
himself, thought otherwise. Apart even from the reply, or the insult
which had provoked it, the general impression was, that The Masque
would not have failed in attending a festival, which, by the very
costume which it imposed, offered so favorable a cloak to his own
mysterious purposes. In this persuasion, Adorni took all the
precautions which personal vengeance and Venetian subtlety could
suggest, for availing himself of the single opportunity that would,
perhaps, ever be allowed him for entrapping this public enemy, who had
now become a private one to himself.

These various incidents had furnished abundant matter for conversation
in Klosterheim, and had carried the public expectation to the highest
pitch of anxiety, some time before the great evening arrived. Leisure
had been allowed for fear, and every possible anticipation of the
wildest character, to unfold themselves. Hope, even, amongst many, was
a predominant sensation. Ladies were preparing for hysterics.
Cavaliers, besides the swords which they wore as regular articles of
dress, were providing themselves with stilettoes against any sudden
rencontre hand to hand, or any unexpected surprise. Armorers and
furbishers of weapons were as much in request as the more appropriate
artists who minister to such festal occasions. These again were
summoned to give their professional aid and attendance to an extent so
much out of proportion to their numbers and their natural power of
exertion, that they were harassed beyond all physical capacity of
endurance, and found their ingenuity more heavily taxed to find
personal substitutes amongst the trades most closely connected with
their own, than in any of the contrivances which more properly fell
within the business of their own art. Tailors, horse-milliners,
shoemakers, friseurs, drapers, mercers, tradesmen of every description,
and servants of every class and denomination, were summoned to a
sleepless activity--each in his several vocation, or in some which he
undertook by proxy. Artificers who had escaped on political motives
from Nuremburg and other imperial cities, or from the sack of
Magdeburg, now showed their ingenuity, and their readiness to earn the
bread of industry; and if Klosterheim resembled a hive in the close-
packed condition of its inhabitants, it was now seen that the
resemblance held good hardly less in the industry which, upon a
sufficient excitement, it was able to develop. But, in the midst of all
this stir, din, and unprecedented activity, whatever occupation each
man found for his thoughts or for his hands in his separate
employments, all hearts were mastered by one domineering interest--the
approaching collision of the Landgrave, before his assembled court,
with the mysterious agent who had so long troubled his repose.


CHAPTER XIV


The day at length arrived; the guards were posted in unusual strength;
the pages of honor, and servants in their state-dresses, were drawn up
in long and gorgeous files along the sides of the vast Gothic halls,
which ran in continued succession from the front of the _schloss_
to the more modern saloons in the rear; bands of military music,
collected from amongst the foreign prisoners of various nations at
Vienna, were stationed in their national costume--Italian, Hungarian,
Turkish, or Croatian--in the lofty galleries or corridors which ran
round the halls; and the deep thunders of the kettle-drums, relieved by
cymbals and wind-instruments, began to fill the mazes of the palace as
early as seven o'clock in the evening; for at that hour, according to
the custom then established in Germany, such entertainments commenced.
Repeated volleys from long lines of musketeers, drawn up in the square,
and at the other entrances of the palace, with the deep roar of
artillery, announced the arrival of the more distinguished visitors;
amongst whom it was rumored that several officers in supreme command
from the Swedish camp, already collected in the neighborhood, were this
night coming _incognito_--availing themselves of their masques to
visit the Landgrave, and improve the terms of their alliance, whilst
they declined the risk which they might have brought on themselves by
too open a visit, in their own avowed characters and persons, to a town
so unsettled in its state of feeling, and so friendly to the emperor,
as Klosterheim had notoriously become.

From seven to nine o'clock, in one unbroken line of succession,
gorgeous parties streamed along through the halls, a distance of full
half a quarter of a mile, until they were checked by the barriers
erected at the entrance to the first of the entertaining rooms, as the
station for examining the tickets of admission. This duty was fulfilled
in a way which, though really rigorous in the extreme, gave no
inhospitable annoyance to the visitors; the barriers themselves
concealed their jealous purpose of hostility, and in a manner disavowed
the secret awe and mysterious terror which brooded over the evening, by
the beauty of their external appearance. They presented a triple line
of gilt lattice-work, rising to a great altitude, and connected with
the fretted roof by pendent draperies of the most magnificent velvet,
intermingled with banners and heraldic trophies suspended from the
ceiling, and at intervals slowly agitated in the currents which now and
then swept these aerial heights. In the centre of the lattice opened a
single gate, on each side of which were stationed a couple of sentinels
armed to the teeth; and this arrangement was repeated three times, so
rigorous was the vigilance employed. At the second of the gates, where
the bearer of a forged ticket would have found himself in a sort of
trap, with absolutely no possibility of escape, every individual of
each successive party presented his card of admission, and, fortunately
for the convenience of the company, in consequence of the particular
precaution used, one moment's inspection sufficed. The cards had been
issued to the parties invited not very long before the time of
assembling; consequently, as each was sealed with a private seal of the
Landgrave's, sculptured elaborately with his armorial bearings, forgery
would have been next to impossible.

These arrangements, however, were made rather to relieve the company
from the too powerful terrors which haunted them, and to possess them
from the first with a sense of security, than for the satisfaction of
the Landgrave or his minister. They were sensible that The Masque had
it in his power to command an access from the interior--and this it
seemed next to impossible altogether to prevent; nor was _that_
indeed the wish of Adorni, but rather to facilitate his admission, and
afterwards, when satisfied of his actual presence, to bar up all
possibility of retreat. Accordingly, the interior arrangements, though
perfectly prepared, and ready to close up at the word of command, were
for the present but negligently enforced.

Thus stood matters at nine o'clock, by which time upwards of a thousand
persons had assembled; and in ten minutes more an officer reported that
the whole twelve hundred were present, without one defaulter.

The Landgrave had not yet appeared, his minister having received the
company; nor was he expected to appear for an hour--in reality, he was
occupied in political discussion with some of the illustrious
_incognitos_. But this did not interfere with the progress of the
festival; and at this moment nothing could be more impressive than the
far-stretching splendors of the spectacle.

In one immense saloon, twelve hundred cavaliers and ladies, attired in
the unrivalled pomp of that age, were arranging themselves for one of
the magnificent Hungarian dances, which the emperor's court at Vienna
had transplanted to the camp of Wallenstein, and thence to all the
great houses of Germany. Bevies of noble women, in every variety of
fanciful costume, but in each considerable group presenting deep masses
of black or purple velvet, on which, with the most striking advantage
of radiant relief, lay the costly pearl ornaments, or the sumptuous
jewels, so generally significant in those times of high ancestral
pretensions, intermingled with the drooping plumes of martial
cavaliers, who presented almost universally the soldierly air of
frankness which belongs to active service, mixed with the Castilian
_grandezza_ that still breathed through the camps of Germany,
emanating originally from the magnificent courts of Brussels, of
Madrid, and of Vienna, and propagated to this age by the links of
Tilly, the Bavarian commander, and Wallenstein, the more than princely
commander for the emperor. Figures and habiliments so commanding were
of themselves enough to fill the eye and occupy the imagination; but,
beyond all this, feelings of awe and mystery, under more shapes than
one, brooded over the whole scene, and diffused a tone of suspense and
intense excitement throughout the vast assembly. It was known that
illustrious strangers were present _incognito_. There now began to
be some reason for anticipating a great battle in the neighborhood. The
men were now present, perhaps, the very hands were now visibly
displayed for the coming dance, which in a few days, or even hours (so
rapid were the movements at this period), were to wield the truncheon
that might lay the Catholic empire prostrate, or might mould the
destiny of Europe for centuries. Even this feeling gave way to one
still more enveloped in shades--The Masque! Would he keep his promise,
and appear? might he not be there already? might he not even now be
moving amongst them? may he not, even at this very moment, thought each
person, secretly be near me--or even touching myself--or haunting my
own steps?

Yet again thought most people (for at that time hardly anybody affected
to be incredulous in matters allied to the supernatural), was this
mysterious being liable to touch? Was he not of some impassive nature,
inaudible, invisible, impalpable? Many of his escapes, if truly
reported, seemed to argue as much. If, then, connected with the
spiritual world, was it with the good or the evil in that inscrutable
region? But, then, the bloodshed, the torn dresses, the marks of deadly
struggle, which remained behind in some of those cases where mysterious
disappearances had occurred,--these seemed undeniable arguments of
murder, foul and treacherous murder. Every attempt, in short, to
penetrate the mystery of this being's nature, proved as abortive as the
attempts to intercept his person; and all efforts at applying a
solution to the difficulties of the case made the mystery even more
mysterious.

These thoughts, however, generally as they pervaded the company, would
have given way, for a time at least, to the excitement of the scene;
for a sudden clapping of hands from some officers of the household, to
enforce attention, and as a signal to the orchestra in one of the
galleries, at this moment proclaimed that the dances were on the point
of commencing in another half-minute, when suddenly a shriek from a
female, and then a loud, tumultuous cry from a multitude of voices,
announced some fearful catastrophe; and in the next moment a shout of
"Murder!" froze the blood of the timid amongst the company.


CHAPTER XV.


So vast was the saloon, that it had been impossible, through the maze
of figures, the confusion of colors, and the mingling of a thousand
voices, that anything should be perceived distinctly at the lower end
of all that was now passing at the upper. Still, so awful is the
mystery of life, and so hideous and accursed in man's imagination is
every secret extinction of toat consecrated lamp, that no news thrills
so deeply, or travels so rapidly. Hardly could it be seen in what
direction, or through whose communication, yet in less than a minute a
movement of sympathizing horror, and uplifted hands, announced that the
dreadful news had reached them. A murder, it was said, had been
committed in the palace. Ladies began to faint; others hastened away in
search of friends; others to learn the news more accurately; and some
of the gentlemen, who thought themselves sufficiently privileged by
rank, hurried off with a stream of agitated inquirers to the interior
of the castle, in search of the scene itself. A few only passed the
guard in the first moments of confusion, and penetrated, with the
agitated Adorni, through the long and winding passages, into the very
scene of the murder. A rumor had prevailed for a moment that the
Landgrave was himself the victim; and as the road by which the agitated
household conducted them took a direction towards his highness' suite
of rooms, at first Adorni had feared that result. Recovering his self-
possession, however, at length, he learned that it was the poor old
seneschal upon whom the blow had fallen. And he pressed on with more
coolness to the dreadful spectacle.

The poor old man was stretched at his length on the floor. It did not
seem that he had struggled with the murderer. Indeed, from some
appearances, it seemed probable that he had been attacked whilst
sleeping; and though he had received three wounds, it was pronounced by
a surgeon that one of them (and _that_, from circumstances, the
first) had been sufficient to extinguish life. He was discovered by his
daughter, a woman who held some respectable place amongst the servants
of the castle; and every presumption concurred in fixing the time of
the dreadful scene to about one hour before.

"Such, gentlemen, are the acts of this atrocious monster, this Masque,
who has so long been the scourge of Klosterheim," said Adorni to the
strangers who had accompanied him, as they turned away on their return
to the company; "but this very night, I trust, will put a bridle in his
mouth."

"God grant it may be so!" said some. But others thought the whole case
too mysterious for conjectures, and too solemn to be decided by
presumptions. And in the midst of agitated discussions on the scene
they had just witnessed, as well as the whole history of The Masque,
the party returned to the saloon.

Under ordinary circumstances, this dreadful event would have damped the
spirits of the company; as it was, it did but deepen the gloomy
excitement which already had possession of all present, and raise a
more intense expectation of the visit so publicly announced by The
Masque. It seemed as though he had perpetrated this recent murder
merely by way of reviving the impression of his own dreadful character
in Klosterheim, which might have decayed a little of late, in all its
original strength and freshness of novelty; or, as though he wished to
send immediately before him an act of atrocity that should form an
appropriate herald or harbinger of his own entrance upon the scene.

Dreadful, however, as this deed of darkness was, it seemed of too
domestic a nature to exercise any continued influence upon so
distinguished an assembly, so numerous, so splendid, and brought
together at so distinguished a summons. Again, therefore, the masques
prepared to mingle in the dance; again the signal was given; again the
obedient orchestra preluded to the coming strains. In a moment more,
the full tide of harmony swept along. The vast saloon, and its echoing
roof, rang with the storm of music. The masques, with their floating
plumes and jewelled caps, glided through the fine mazes of the
Hungarian dances. All was one magnificent and tempestuous confusion,
overflowing with the luxury of sound and sight, when suddenly, about
midnight, a trumpet sounded, the Landgrave entered, and all was hushed.
The glittering crowd arranged themselves in a half-circle at the upper
end of the room; his highness went rapidly round, saluting the company,
and receiving their homage in return. A signal was again made; the
music and the dancing were resumed; and such was the animation and the
turbulent delight amongst the gayer part of the company, from the
commingling of youthful blood with wine, lights, music, and festal
conversation, that, with many, all thoughts of the dreadful Masque, who
"reigned by night in Klosterheim," had faded before the exhilaration of
the moment. Midnight had come; the dreadful apparition had not yet
entered; young ladies began timidly to jest upon the subject, though as
yet but faintly, and in a tone somewhat serious for a jest; and young
cavaliers, who, to do them justice, had derived most part of their
terrors from the superstitious view of the case, protested to their
partners that if The Masque, on making his appearance, should conduct
himself in a manner unbecoming a cavalier, or offensive to the ladies
present, they should feel it their duty to chastise him; "though," said
they, "with respect to old Adorni, should The Masque think proper to
teach him better manners, or even to cane him, we shall not find it
necessary to interfere."

Several of the very young ladies protested that, of all things, they
should like to see a battle between old Adorni and The Masque, "such a
love of a quiz that old Adorni is!" whilst others debated whether The
Masque would turn out a young man or an old one; and a few elderly
maidens mooted the point whether he were likely to be a "single"
gentleman, or burdened with a "wife and family." These and similar
discussions were increasing in vivacity, and kindling more and more
gayety of repartee, when suddenly, with the effect of a funeral knell
upon their mirth, a whisper began to circulate that _there was one
Masque too many in company_. Persons had been stationed by Adorni in
different galleries, with instructions to note accurately the dress of
every person in the company; to watch the motions of every one who gave
the slightest cause for suspicion, by standing aloof from the rest of
the assembly, or by any other peculiarity of manner; but, above all, to
count the numbers of the total assembly. This last injunction was more
easily obeyed than at first sight seemed possible. At this time the
Hungarian dances, which required a certain number of partners to
execute the movements of the figure, were of themselves a sufficient
register of the precise amount of persons engaged in them. And, as
these dances continued for a long time undisturbed, this calculation
once made, left no further computation necessary, than simply to take
the account of all who stood otherwise engaged. This list, being much
the smaller one, was soon made; and the reports of several different
observers, stationed in different galleries, and checked by each other,
all tallied in reporting a total of just _twelve hundred and one
persons_, after every allowance was made for the known members of
the Landgrave's suite, who were all unmasqued.

This report was announced with considerable trepidation, in a very
audible whisper, to Adorni and the Landgrave. The buzz of agitation
attracted instant attention; the whisper was loud enough to catch the
ears of several; the news went rapidly kindling through the room that
the company was too many by one: all the ladies trembled, their knees
shook, their voices failed, they stopped in the very middle of
questions, answers halted for their conclusion, and were never more
remembered by either party; the very music began to falter, the lights
seemed to wane and sicken; for the fact was new too evident that The
Masque had kept his appointment, and was at this moment in the room "to
meet the Landgrave and his honorable company."

Adorni and the Landgrave now walked apart from the rest of the
household, and were obviously consulting together on the next step to
be taken, or on the proper moment for executing one which had already
been decided on. Some crisis seemed approaching, and the knees of many
ladies knocked together, as they anticipated some cruel or bloody act
of vengeance. "O poor Masque!" sighed a young lady, in her tender-
hearted concern for one who seemed now at the mercy of his enemies: "do
you think, sir," addressing her partner, "they will cut him to
pieces?"--"O, that wicked old Adorni!" exclaimed another; "I know he
will stick the poor Masque on one side and somebody else will stick him
on the other; I know he will, because The Masque called him a tailor;
do you think he _was_ a tailor sir?"--"Why, really, madam, he
walks like a tailor; but, then he must be a very bad one, considering
how ill his own clothes are made; and _that_, you know, is next
door to being none at all. But, see, his highness is going to stop the
music."

In fact, at that moment the Landgrave made a signal to the orchestra:
the music ceased abruptly; and his highness, advancing to the company,
who stood eagerly awaiting his words, said: "Illustrious and noble
friends! for a very urgent and special cause I will request of you all
to take your seats."

The company obeyed, every one sought the chair next to him, or, if a
lady, accepted that which was offered by the cavalier at her side. The
standers continually diminished. Two hundred were left, one hundred and
fifty, eighty, sixty, twenty, till at last they were reduced to two,--
both gentlemen, who had been attending upon ladies. They were suddenly
aware of their own situation. One chair only remained out of twelve
hundred. Eager to exonerate himself from suspicion, each sprang
furiously to this seat; each attained it at the same moment, and each
possessed himself of part at the same instant. As they happened to be
two elderly, corpulent men, the younger cavaliers, under all the
restraints of the moment, the panic of the company, and the Landgraves
presence, could not forbear laughing; and the more spirited amongst the
young ladies caught the infection.

His highness was little in a temper to brook this levity, and hastened
to relieve the joint occupants of the chair from the ridicule of their
situation. "Enough!" he exclaimed, "enough! All my friends are
requested to resume the situation most agreeable to them; my purpose is
answered." The prince was himself standing with all his household, and,
as a point of respect, all the company rose. ("_As you were_,"
whispered the young soldiers to their fair companions.)

Adorni now came forward. "It is known," said he, "by trials more than
sufficient, that some intruder, with the worst intentions, has crept
into this honorable company. The ladies present will therefore have the
goodness to retire apart to the lower end of the saloon, whilst the
noble cavaliers will present themselves in succession to six officers
of his highness' household, to whom they will privately communicate
their names and quality."

This arrangement was complied with,--not, however, without the exchange
of a few flying jests on the part of the younger cavaliers and their
fair partners, as they separated for the purpose. The cavaliers, who
were rather more than five hundred in number, went up as they were
summoned by the number marked upon their cards of admission, and,
privately communicating with some one of the officers appointed, were
soon told off, and filed away to the right of the Landgrave, waiting
for the signal which should give them permission to rejoin their
parties.

All had been now told off, within a score. These were clustered
together in a group; and in that group undoubtedly was The Masque.
Every eye was converged upon this small knot of cavaliers; each of the
spectators, according to his fancy, selected the one who came nearest
in dress, or in personal appearance, to his preconceptions of that
mysterious agent. Not a word was uttered, not a whisper; hardly a robe
was heard to rustle, or a feather to wave.

The twenty were rapidly reduced to twelve, these to six, the six to
four--three--two; the tale of the invited was complete, and one man
remained behind. That was, past doubting, The Masque!


CHAPTER XVI.


"There stands he that governs Klosterheim by night!" thought every
cavalier, as he endeavored to pierce the gloomy being's concealment
with penetrating eyes, or, by scrutiny ten times repeated, to unmasque
the dismal secrets which lurked beneath his disguise. "There stands the
gloomy murderer!" thought another. "There stands the poor detected
criminal," thought the pitying young ladies, "who in the next moment
must lay bare his breast to the Landgrave's musketeers."

The figure, meantime, stood tranquil and collected, apparently not in
the least disturbed by the consciousness of his situation, or the
breathless suspense of more than a thousand spectators of rank and
eminent station, all bending their looks upon himself. He had been
leaning against a marble column, as if wrapped up in revery, and
careless of everything about him. But when the dead silence announced
that the ceremony was closed, that he only remained to answer for
himself, and upon palpable proof--evidence not to be gainsayed--
incapable of answering satisfactorily; when, in fact, it was beyond
dispute that here was at length revealed, in bodily presence, before
the eyes of those whom he had so long haunted with terrors, The Masque
of Klosterheim,--it was naturally expected that now, at least, he would
show alarm and trepidation; that he would prepare for defence, or
address himself to instant flight.

Far otherwise! Cooler than any one person beside in the saloon, he
stood, like the marble column against which he had been reclining,
upright, massy, and imperturbable. He was enveloped in a voluminous
mantle, which, at this moment, with a leisurely motion, he suffered to
fall at his feet, and displayed a figure in which the grace of an
Antinous met with the columnar strength of a Grecian Hercules,--
presenting, in its _tout ensemble_, the majestic proportions of a
Jupiter. He stood--a breathing statue of gladiatorial beauty, towering
above all who were near him, and eclipsing the noblest specimens of the
human form which the martial assembly presented. A buzz of admiration
arose, which in the following moment was suspended by the dubious
recollections investing his past appearances, and the terror which
waited even on his present movements. He was armed to the teeth; and he
was obviously preparing to move.

Not a word had yet been spoken; so tumultuous was the succession of
surprises, so mixed and conflicting the feelings, so intense the
anxiety. The arrangement of the groups was this: At the lower half of
the room, but starting forward in attitudes of admiration or suspense,
were the ladies of Klosterheim. At the upper end, in the centre, one
hand raised to bespeak attention, was The Masque of Klosterheim. To his
left, and a little behind him, with a subtle Venetian countenance, one
hand waving back a half file of musketeers, and the other raised as if
to arrest the arm of The Masque, was the wily minister Adorni, creeping
nearer and nearer with a stealthy stride. To his right was the great
body of Klosterheim cavaliers, a score of students and young officers
pressing forward to the front; but in advance of the whole, the
Landgrave of X----, haughty, lowering, and throwing out looks of
defiance. These were the positions and attitudes in which the first
discovery of The Masque had surprised them; and these they still
retained. Less dignified spectators were looking downwards from the
galleries.

"Surrender!" was the first word by which silence was broken; it came
from the Landgrave.

"Or die!" exclaimed Adorni.

"He dies in any case," rejoined the prince.

The Masque still raised his hand with the action of one who bespeaks
attention. Adorni he deigned not to notice. Slightly inclining his head
to the Landgrave, in a tone to which it might be the headdress of
elaborate steel work that gave a sepulchral tone, he replied:

"The Masque, who rules in Klosterheim by night, surrenders not. He can
die. But first he will complete the ceremony of the night; he will
reveal himself."

"That is superfluous," exclaimed Adorni; "we need no further
revelations. Seize him, and lead him out to death!"

"Dog of an Italian!" replied The Masque, drawing a dag from his belt, "die first
yourself!" And so saying, he slowly turned and levelled the barrel at
Adorni, who fled with two bounds to the soldiers in the rear. Then,
withdrawing the weapon hastily, he added, in a tone of cool contempt,
"Or bridle that coward's tongue."

But this was not the minister's intention. "Seize him!" he cried again
impetuously to the soldiers, laying his hand on the arm of the
foremost, and pointing them forward to their prey.

"No!" said the Landgrave, with a commanding voice; "halt! I bid you."
Something there was in the tone, or it might be that there was
something in his private recollections, or something in the general
mystery, which promised a discovery that he feared to lose by the too
precipitate vengeance of the Italian. "What is it, mysterious being,
that you would reveal? Or who is it that you now believe interested in
your revelations?"

"Yourself.--Prince, it would seem that you have me at your mercy:
wherefore, then, the coward haste of this Venetian hound? I am one; you
are many. Lead me, then, out; shoot me. But no: freely I entered this
hall; freely I will leave it. If I must die, I will die as a soldier.
Such I am; and neither runagate from a foreign land, nor "--turning to
Adorni-"a base mechanic."

"But a murderer!" shrieked Adorni: "but a murderer; and with hands yet
reeking from innocent blood!"

"Blood, Adorni, that I will yet avenge.--Prince, you demand the nature
of my revelations. I will reveal my name, my quality, and my mission."

"And to whom?"

"To yourself, and none beside. And, as a pledge for the sincerity of my
discoveries, I will first of all communicate a dreadful secret, known,
as you fondly believe, to none but your highness. Prince, dare you
receive my revelations?"

Speaking thus, The Masque took one step to the rear, turning his back
upon the room, and by a gesture signified his wish that the Landgrave
should accompany him. But at this motion ten or a dozen of the foremost
among the young cavaliers started forward in advance of the Landgrave,
in part forming a half-circle about his person, and in part commanding
the open doorway.

"He is armed!" they exclaimed; "and trebly armed: will your highness
approach him too nearly?"

"I fear him not," said the Landgrave, with something of a contemptuous
tone.

"Wherefore should you fear me?" retorted The Masque, with a manner so
tranquil and serene as involuntarily to disarm suspicion. "Were it
possible that I should seek the life of any man here in particular, in
that case (pointing to the fire-arms in his belt), why should I need to
come nearer? Were it possible that any should find in my conduct here a
motive to a personal vengeance upon myself, which of you is not near
enough? Has your highness the courage to trample on such terrors?"

Thus challenged, as it were, to a trial of his courage before the
assembled rank of Klosterheim, the Landgrave waved off all who would
have stepped forward officiously to his support. If he felt any
tremors, he was now sensible that pride and princely honor called upon
him to dissemble them. And, probably, that sort of tremors which he
felt in reality did not point in a direction to which physical support,
such as was now tendered, could have been available. He hesitated no
longer, but strode forward to meet The Masque. His highness and The
Masque met near the archway of the door, in the very centre of the
groups.

With a thrilling tone, deep, piercing, full of alarm, The Masque began
thus:

"To win your confidence, forever to establish credit with your
highness, I will first of all reveal the name of that murderer who this
night dared to pollute your palace with an old man's blood. Prince,
bend your ear a little this way."

With a shudder, and a visible effort of self-command, the Landgrave
inclined his ear to The Masque, who added,--

"Your highness will be shocked to hear it:" then, in a lower tone, "Who
could have believed it?--It was----." All was pronounced clearly and
strongly, except the last word--the name of the murderer; _that_ was
made audible only to the Landgrave's ear.

Sudden and tremendous was the effect upon the prince: he reeled a few
paces off; put his hand to the hilt of his sword; smote his forehead;
threw frenzied looks upon The Masque,--now half imploring, now dark
with vindictive wrath. Then succeeded a pause of profoundest silence,
during which all the twelve hundred visitors, whom he had himself
assembled as if expressly to make them witnesses of this extraordinary
scene, and of the power with which a stranger could shake him to and
fro in a tempestuous strife of passions, were looking and hearkening
with senses on the stretch to pierce the veil of silence and of
distance. At last the Landgrave mastered his emotion sufficiently to
say, "Well, sir, what next?"

"Next comes a revelation of another kind; and I warn you, sir, that it
will not be less trying to the nerves. For this first I needed your
ear; now I shall need your eyes. Think again, prince, whether you will
stand the trial."

"Pshaw! sir, you trifle with me; again I tell you--" But here the
Landgrave spoke with an affectation of composure, and with an effort
that did not escape notice;--"again I tell you that I fear you not. Go
on."

"Then come forward a little, please your highness, to the light of this
lamp." So saying, with a step or two in advance, he drew the prince
under the powerful glare of a lamp suspended near the great archway of
entrance from the interior of the palace. Both were now standing with
their faces entirely averted from the spectators. Still more
effectually, however, to screen himself from any of those groups on the
left, whose advanced position gave them somewhat more the advantage of
an oblique aspect, The Masque, at this moment, suddenly drew up, with
his left hand, a short Spanish mantle which depended from his
shoulders, and now gave him the benefit of a lateral screen. Then, so
far as the company behind them could guess at his act, unlocking with
his right hand and raising the masque which shrouded his mysterious
features, he shouted aloud, in a voice that rang clear through every
corner of the vast saloon, "Landgrave, for crimes yet unrevealed, I
summon you, in twenty days, before a tribunal where there is no shield
but innocence" and at that moment turned his countenance full upon the
prince.

With a yell, rather than a human expression of terror, the Landgrave
fell, as if shot by a thunderbolt, stretched at his full length upon
the ground, lifeless apparently, and bereft of consciousness or
sensation. A sympathetic cry of horror arose from the spectators. All
rushed towards The Masque. The young cavaliers, who had first stepped
forward as volunteers in the Landgrave's defence, were foremost, and
interposed between The Masque and the outstretched arms of Adorni, as
if eager to seize him first. In an instant a sudden and dense cloud of
smoke arose, nobody knew whence. Repeated discharges of fire-arms were
heard resounding from the doorway and the passages; these increased the
smoke and the confusion. Trumpets sounded through the corridors. The
whole archway, under which The Masque and the Landgrave had been
standing, became choked up with soldiery, summoned by the furious
alarms that echoed through the palace. All was one uproar and chaos of
masques, plumes, helmets, halberds, trumpets, gleaming sabres, and the
fierce faces of soldiery forcing themselves through the floating
drapery of smoke that now filled the whole upper end of the saloon.
Adorni was seen in the midst, raving fruitlessly. Nobody heard, nobody
listened. Universal panic had seized the household, the soldiery, and
the company. Nobody understood exactly for what purpose the tumult had
commenced--in what direction it tended. Some tragic catastrophe was
reported from mouth to mouth: nobody knew what. Some said the Landgrave
had been assassinated; some, The Masque; some asserted that both had
perished under reciprocal assaults. More believed that The Masque had
proved to be of that supernatural order of beings, with which the
prevailing opinions of Klosterheim had long classed him; and that, upon
raising his disguise, he had revealed to the Landgrave the fleshless
skull of some forgotten tenant of the grave. This indeed seemed to many
the only solution that, whilst it fell in with the prejudices and
superstitions of the age, was of a nature to account for that
tremendous effect which the discovery had produced upon the Landgrave.
But it was one that naturally could be little calculated to calm the
agitations of the public prevailing at this moment. This spread
contagiously. The succession of alarming events,--the murder, the
appearance of The Masque, his subsequent extraordinary behavior, the
overwhelming impression upon the Landgrave, which had formed the
catastrophe of this scenical exhibition,--the consternation of the
great Swedish officers, who were spending the night in Klosterheim, and
reasonably suspected that the tumult might be owing to the sudden
detection of their own _incognito_, and that, in consequence, the
populace of this imperial city were suddenly rising to arms; the
endless distraction and counter-action of so many thousand persons--
visitors, servants, soldiery, household--all hurrying to the same
point, and bringing assistance to a danger of which nobody knew the
origin, nobody the nature, nobody the issue; multitudes commanding
where all obedience was forgotten, all subordination had gone to
wreck;--these circumstances of distraction united to sustain a scene of
absolute frenzy in the castle, which, for more than half an hour, the
dense columns of smoke aggravated alarmingly, by raising, in many
quarters, additional terrors of fire. And when, at last, after infinite
exertions, the soldiery had deployed into the ball-room and the
adjacent apartments of state, and had succeeded, at the point of the
pike, in establishing a safe egress for the twelve hundred visitors, it
was then first ascertained that all traces of The Masque had been lost
in the smoke and subsequent confusion; and that, with his usual good
fortune, he had succeeded in baffling his pursuers.


CHAPTER XVII.


Meantime the Lady Paulina had spent her time in secret grief,
inconsolable for the supposed tragical fate of Maximilian. It was
believed that he had perished. This opinion had prevailed equally
amongst his friends, and the few enemies whom circumstances had made
him. Supposing even that he had escaped with life from the action, it
seemed inevitable that he should have fallen into the hands of the
bloody Holkerstein; and under circumstances which would point him out
to the vengeance of that cruel ruffian as having been the leader in the
powerful resistance which had robbed him of his prey.

Stung with the sense of her irreparable loss, and the premature grief
which had blighted her early hopes, Paulina sought her refuge in
solitude, and her consolations in religion. In the convent where she
had found a home, the ceremonies of the Roman Catholic service were
maintained with the strictness and the pomp suitable to its ample
endowments. The emperor had himself, as well as several of his
progenitors, been a liberal benefactor to this establishment. And a
lady of his house, therefore, recommended by a special introduction
from the emperor to the attentions of the lady abbess, was sure of
meeting kindness and courtesy in every possible shape which could avail
to mitigate her sorrow. The abbess, though a bigot, was a human being,
with strong human sensibilities; and in both characters she was greatly
pleased with the Lady Paulina. On the one hand, her pride, as the head
of a religious establishment, was flattered by the extreme regularity
of the Lady Paulina in conforming to the ritual of her house; this
example of spiritual obedience and duty seemed peculiarly edifying in a
person of such distinguished rank. On the other hand, her womanly
sensibilities were touched by the spectacle of early and unmerited
sorrow in one so eminent for her personal merits, for her extreme
beauty, and the winning sweetness of her manners. Hence she readily
offered to the young countess all the attentions and marks of sympathy
which her retiring habits permitted, and every species of indulgence
compatible with the spirit of the institution.

The whole convent, nuns as well as strangers, taking their tone from
the abbess, vied with each other in attentions to Paulina. But, whilst
acknowledging their kindness, she continued to shrink from all general
intercourse with the society about her. Her attendance was constant at
the matins and at vespers; not unfrequently even at the midnight
service; but dejection was too rooted in her heart, to allow her any
disposition to enter into the amusements or mixed society which the
convent at that time offered.

Many noble strangers had been allowed to take up their quarters in the
convent. With some of these the abbess was connected by blood; with
others, by ties of ancient friendship. Most of this party composed a
little society apart from the rest, and continued to pursue those
amusements or occupations which properly belonged to their stations and
quality, but by their too worldly nature were calculated to exclude the
religious members of the institution from partaking in them. To this
society Paulina received frequent invitations; which, however, she
declined so uniformly, that at length all efforts ceased to draw her
from the retirement which she so manifestly adhered to from choice. The
motives of her dejection became known throughout the convent, and were
respected; and it was now reported amongst them, from her aversion to
society as well as her increasing devotion, that the Lady Paulina would
soon take the veil.

Amongst the strangers was one, a lady of mature age, with beauty still
powerful enough to fascinate all beholders, who seemed to survey
Paulina with an interest far beyond that of curiosity or simple
admiration. Sorrow might be supposed the common bond which connected
them; for there were rumors amongst the sisterhood of St. Agnes that
this lady had suffered afflictions heavier than fell to an ordinary lot
in the course of the war which now desolated Germany. Her husband (it
was said), of whom no more was known than that he was some officer of
high rank, had perished by the hand of violence; a young daughter, the
only child of two or three who remained to her, had been carried off in
infancy, and no traces remained of her subsequent fate. To these
misfortunes was added the loss of her estates and rank, which, in some
mysterious way, were supposed to be withheld from her by one of those
great oppressors whom war and the policy of great allies had
aggrandized. It was supposed even that for the means of subsistence to
herself, and a few faithful attendants, she was indebted to the
kindness of the lady abbess, with whom she was closely connected by
ancient friendship.

In this tale there were many inaccuracies mixed up with the truth. It
was true that, in some one of the many dire convulsions which had
passed from land to land since the first outbreak of the Bohemian
troubles, in 1618, and which had covered with a veil of political
pretexts so many local acts of private family feud and murderous
treason, this lady had been deprived of her husband by a violent death
under circumstances which still seemed mysterious. But the fate of her
children, if any had survived the calamity which took off her husband,
was unknown to everybody except her confidential protectress, the lady
abbess. By permission of this powerful friend, who had known her from
infancy, and through the whole course of her misfortunes, she was
permitted to take up her abode in the convent, under special
privileges, and was there known by the name of Sister Madeline.

The intercourse of the Sister Madeline with the lady abbess was free
and unreserved. At all hours they entered each other's rooms with the
familiarity of sisters; and it might have been thought that in every
respect they stood upon the equal footing of near relatives, except
that occasionally in the manners of the abbess was traced, or imagined,
a secret air of deference towards the desolate Sister Madeline, which,
as it was not countenanced at all by their present relations to each
other, left people at liberty to build upon it a large superstructure
of romantic conjectures.

Sister Madeline was as regular in her attendance upon prayers as
Paulina. There, if nowhere else, they were sure of meeting; and in no
long time it became evident that the younger lady was an object of
particular interest to the elder. When the sublime fugues of the old
composers for the organ swelled upon the air, and filled the vast
aisles of the chapel with their floating labyrinths of sound, attention
to the offices of the church service being suspended for the time, the
Sister Madeline spent the interval in watching the countenance of
Paulina. Invariably at this period her eyes settled upon the young
countess, and appeared to court some return of attention, by the tender
sympathy which her own features expressed with the grief too legibly
inscribed upon Paulina's. For some time Paulina, absorbed by her own
thoughts, failed to notice this very particular expression of attention
and interest. Accustomed to the gaze of crowds, as well on account of
her beauty as her connection with the imperial house, she found nothing
new or distressing in this attention to herself. After some time,
however, observing herself still haunted by the sister's furtive
glances, she found her own curiosity somewhat awakened in return. The
manners of Sister Madeline were too dignified, and her face expressed
too much of profound feeling, and traces too inextinguishable of the
trials through which she had passed, to allow room for any belief that
she was under the influence of an ordinary curiosity. Paulina was
struck with a confused feeling, that she looked upon features which had
already been familiar to her heart, though disguised in Sister Madeline
by age, by sex, and by the ravages of grief. She had the appearance of
having passed her fiftieth year; but it was probable that, spite of a
brilliant complexion, secret sorrow had worked a natural effect in
giving to her the appearance of age more advanced by seven or eight
years than she had really attained. Time, at all events, if it had
carried off forever her youthful graces, neither had nor seemed likely
to destroy the impression of majestic beauty under eclipse and wane. No
one could fail to read the signs by which the finger of nature
announces a great destiny, and a mind born to command.

Insensibly the two ladies had established a sort of intercourse by
looks; and at length, upon finding that the Sister Madeline mixed no
more than herself in the general society of Klosterheim, Paulina had
resolved to seek the acquaintance of a lady whose deportment announced
that she would prove an interesting acquaintance, whilst her melancholy
story and the expression of her looks were a sort of pledges that she
would be found a sympathizing friend.

She had already taken some steps towards the attainment of her wishes,
when, unexpectedly, on coming out from the vesper service, the Sister
Madeline placed herself by the side of Paulina, and they walked down
one of the long side-aisles together. The saintly memorials about them,
the records of everlasting peace which lay sculptured at their feet,
and the strains which still ascended to heaven from the organ and the
white-robed choir,--all speaking of a rest from trouble so little to be
found on earth, and so powerfully contrasting with the desolations of
poor, harassed Germany,--affected them deeply, and both burst into
tears. At length the elder lady spoke.

"Daughter, you keep your faith piously with him whom you suppose dead."

Paulina started. The other continued--

"Honor to young hearts that are knit together by ties so firm that even
death has no power to dissolve them! Honor to the love which can breed
so deep a sorrow! Yet, even in this world, the good are not
_always_ the unhappy. I doubt not that, even now at vespers, you
forgot not to pray for him that would willingly have died for you."

"0, gracious lady! when--when have I forgot that? What other prayer,
what other image, is ever at my heart?"

"Daughter, I could not doubt it; and Heaven sometimes sends answers to
prayers when they are least expected; and to yours it sends this
through me."

With these words she stretched out a letter to Paulina, who fainted
with sudden surprise and delight, on recognizing the hand of
Maximilian.


CHAPTER XVIII.


It was, indeed, the handwriting of her lover; and the first words of
the letter, which bore a recent date, announced his safety and his
recovered health. A rapid sketch of all which had befallen him since
they had last parted informed her that he had been severely wounded in
the action with Holkerstein's people, and probably to that misfortune
had been indebted for his life; since the difficulty of transporting
him on horseback, when unable to sit upright, had compelled the party
charged with his care to leave him for the night at Waldenhausen. From
that place he had been carried off in the night-time to a small
imperial garrison in the neighborhood by the care of two faithful
servants, who had found little difficulty in first intoxicating, and
then overpowering, the small guard judged sufficient for a prisoner so
completely disabled by his wounds. In this garrison he had recovered;
had corresponded with Vienna; had concerted measures with the emperor;
and was now on the point of giving full effect to their plans, at the
moment when certain circumstances should arise to favor the scheme.
What these were, he forbore designedly to say in a letter which ran
some risk of falling into the enemy's hands; but he bade Paulina
speedily to expect a great change for the better, which would put it in
their power to meet without restraint or fear; and concluded by giving
utterance in the fondest terms to a lover's hopes and tenderest
anxieties.

Paulina had scarcely recovered from the tumultuous sensations of
pleasure, and sudden restoration to hope, when she received a shock in
the opposite direction, from a summons to attend the Landgrave. The
language of the message was imperative, and more peremptory than had
ever before been addressed to herself, a lady of the imperial family.
She knew the Landgrave's character and his present position; both these
alarmed her, when connected with the style and language of his summons.
For _that_ announced distinctly enough that his resolution had
been now taken to commit himself to a bold course; no longer to hang
doubtfully between two policies, but openly to throw himself into the
arms of the emperor's enemies. In one view, Paulina found a benefit to
her spirits from this haughtiness of the Landgrave's message. She was
neither proud, nor apt to take offence. On the contrary, she was gentle
and meek; for the impulses of youth and elevated birth had in her been
chastened by her early acquaintance with great national calamities, and
the enlarged sympathy which that had bred with her fellow-creatures of
every rank. But she felt that, in this superfluous expression of
authority, the Landgrave was at the same time infringing the rights of
hospitality, and her own privileges of sex. Indignation at his unmanly
conduct gave her spirits to face him, though she apprehended a scene of
violence, and had the more reason to feel the trepidations of
uncertainty, because she very imperfectly comprehended his purposes as
respected herself.

These were not easily explained. She found the Landgrave pacing the
room with violence. His back was turned towards her as she entered;
but, as the usher announced loudly, on her entrance, "The Countess
Paulina of Hohenhelder," he turned impetuously, and advanced to meet
her. With the Landgrave, however irritated, the first impulse was to
comply with the ceremonious observances that belonged to his rank. He
made a cold obeisance, whilst an attendant placed a seat; and then
motioning to all present to withdraw, began to unfold the causes which
had called for Lady Paulina's presence.

So much art was mingled with so much violence, that for some time
Paulina gathered nothing of his real purposes. Resolved, however, to do
justice to her own insulted dignity, she took the first opening which
offered, to remonstrate with the Landgrave on the needless violence of
his summons. His serene highness wielded the sword in Klosterheim, and
could have no reason for anticipating resistance to his commands.

"The Lady Paulina, then, distinguishes between the power and the right?
I expected as much."

"By no means; she knew nothing of the claimants to either. She was a
stranger, seeking only hospitality in Klosterheim, which apparently was
violated by unprovoked exertions of authority."

"But the laws of hospitality," replied the Landgrave, "press equally on
the guest and the host. Each has his separate duties. And the Lady
Paulina, in the character of guest, violated hers from the moment when
she formed cabals in Klosterheim, and ministered to the fury of
conspirators."

"Your ear, sir, is abused; I have not so much as stepped beyond the
precincts of the convent in which I reside, until this day in paying
obedience to your highness' mandate."

"That may be; and that may argue only the more caution and subtlety.
The personal presence of a lady, so distinguished in her appearance as
the Lady Paulina, at any resort of conspirators or intriguers, would
have published too much the suspicions to which such a countenance
would be liable. But in writing have you dispersed nothing calculated
to alienate the attachment of my subjects?"

The Lady Paulina shook her head; she knew not even in what direction
the Landgrave's suspicions pointed.

"As, for example, this--does the Lady Paulina recognize this particular
paper?"

Saying this, he drew forth from a portfolio a letter or paper of
instructions, consisting of several sheets, to which a large official
seal was attached. The countess glanced her eye over it attentively; in
one or two places the words _Maximilian_ and _Klosterheim_ attracted
her attention; but she felt satisfied at once that she now saw it for
the first time.

"Of this paper," she said, at length, in a determined tone, "I know
nothing. The handwriting I believe I may have seen before. It resembles
that of one of the emperor's secretaries. Beyond that, I have no means
of even conjecturing its origin."

"Beware, madam, beware how far you commit yourself. Suppose now this
paper were actually brought in one of your ladyship's mails, amongst
your own private property."

"That may very well be," said Lady Paulina, "and yet imply no falsehood
on my part. Falsehood! I disdain such an insinuation; your highness has
been the first person who ever dared to make it." At that moment she
called to mind the robbery of her carriage at Waldenhausen. Coloring
deeply with indignation, she added, "Even in the case, sir, which you
have supposed, as unconscious bearer of this or any other paper, I am
still innocent of the intentions which such an act might argue in some
people. I am as incapable of offending in that way, as I shall always
be of disavowing any of my own acts, according to your ungenerous
insinuation. But now, sir, tell me how far those may be innocent who
have possessed themselves of a paper carried, as your highness alleges,
among my private baggage. Was it for a prince to countenance a robbery
of that nature, or to appropriate its spoils?"

The blood rushed to the Landgrave's temples. "In these times, young
lady, petty rights of individuals give way to state necessities.
Neither are there any such rights of individuals in bar of such an
inquisition. They are forfeited, as I told you before, when the guest
forgets his duties. But (and here he frowned), it seems to me,
countess, that you are now forgetting your situation; not I, remember,
but yourself, are now placed on trial."

"Indeed!" said the countess, "of that I was certainly not aware. Who,
then, is my accuser, who my judge? Or is it in your serene highness
that I see both?"

"Your accuser, Lady Paulina, is the paper I have shown you, a
treasonable paper. Perhaps I have others to bring forward of the same
bearing. Perhaps this is sufficient."

The Lady Paulina grew suddenly sad and thoughtful. Here was a tyrant,
with matter against her, which, even to an unprejudiced judge, might
really wear some face of plausibility. The paper had perhaps really
been one of those plundered from her carriage. It might really contain
matter fitted to excite disaffection against the Landgrave's
government. Her own innocence of all participation in the designs which
it purposed to abet might find no credit; or might avail her not at all
in a situation so far removed from the imperial protection. She had in
fact unadvisedly entered a city, which, at the time of her entrance,
might be looked upon as neutral, but since then had been forced into
the ranks of the emperor's enemies, too abruptly to allow of warning or
retreat. This was her exact situation. She saw her danger; and again
apprehended that, at the very moment of recovering her lover from the
midst of perils besetting _his_ situation, she might lose him by
the perils of her own.

The Landgrave watched the changes of her countenance, and read her
thoughts.

"Yes," he said, at length, "your situation is one of peril. But take
courage. Confess freely, and you have everything to hope for from my
clemency."

"Such clemency," said a deep voice, from some remote quarter of the
room, "as the wolf shows to the lamb."

Paulina started, and the Landgrave looked angry and perplexed. "Within,
there!" he cried loudly to the attendants in the next room. "I will no
more endure these insults," he exclaimed. "Go instantly, take a file of
soldiers; place them at all the outlets, and search the rooms
adjoining--above, and below. Such mummery is insufferable."

The voice replied again, "Landgrave, you search in vain. Look to
yourself! young Max is upon you!"

"This babbler," said the Landgrave, making an effort to recover his
coolness, "reminds me well; that adventurer, young Maximilian--who is
he? whence comes he? by whom authorized?"

Paulina blushed; but, roused by the Landgrave's contumelious
expressions applied to her lover, she replied, "He is no adventurer;
nor was ever in that class; the emperor's favor is not bestowed upon
such."

"Then, what brings him to Klosterheim? For what is it that he would
trouble the repose of this city?"

Before Paulina could speak in rejoinder, the voice, from a little
further distance, replied, audibly, "For his rights! See that you,
Landgrave, make no resistance."

The prince arose in fury; his eyes flashed fire, he clenched his hands
in impotent determination. The same voice had annoyed him on former
occasions, but never under circumstances which mortified him so deeply.
Ashamed that the youthful countess should be a witness of the insults
put upon him, and seeing that it was in vain to pursue his conversation
with her further in a situation which exposed him to the sarcasms of a
third person, under no restraint of fear or partiality, he adjourned
the further prosecution of his inquiry to another opportunity, and for
the present gave her leave to depart; a license which she gladly
availed herself of, and retired in fear and perplexity.


CHAPTER XIX.


It was dark as Paulina returned to her convent. Two servants of the
Landgrave's preceded her with torches to the great gates of St. Agnes,
which was at a very short distance. At that point she entered within
the shelter of the convent gates, and the prince's servants left her at
her own request. No person was now within call but a little page of her
own, and perhaps the porter at the convent. But after the first turn in
the garden of St. Agnes, she might almost consider herself as left to
her own guardianship; for the little boy, who followed her, was too
young to afford her any effectual help. She felt sorry, as she surveyed
the long avenue of ancient trees, which was yet to be traversed before
she entered upon the cloisters, that she should have dismissed the
servants of the Landgrave. These gardens were easily scaled from the
outside, and a ready communication existed between the remotest parts
of this very avenue and some of the least reputable parts of
Klosterheim. The city now overflowed with people of every rank; and
amongst them were continually recognized, and occasionally challenged,
some of the vilest deserters from the imperial camps. Wallenstein
himself, and other imperial commanders, but, above all, Holk, had
attracted to their standards the very refuse of the German jails; and,
allowing an unlimited license of plunder during some periods of their
career, had themselves evoked a fiendish spirit of lawless aggression
and spoliation, which afterwards they had found it impossible to
exorcise within its former limits. People were everywhere obliged to be
on their guard, not alone (as heretofore) against the military tyrant
or freebooter, but also against the private servants whom they hired
into their service. For some time back, suspicious persons had been
seen strolling at dusk in the gardens of St. Agnes, or even intruding
into the cloisters. Then the recollection of The Masque, now in the
very height of his mysterious career, flashed upon Paulina's thoughts.
Who knew his motives, or the principle of his mysterious warfare--
which, at any rate, in its mode had latterly been marked by bloodshed?
As these things came rapidly into her mind, she trembled more from fear
than from the wintry wind, which now blew keenly and gustily through
the avenue.

The gardens of St. Agnes were extensive, and Paulina yet wanted two
hundred yards of reaching the cloisters, when she observed a dusky
object stealing along the margin of a little pool, which in parts lay
open to the walk, whilst in others, where the walk receded from the
water, the banks were studded with thickets of tall shrubs. Paulina
stopped and observed the figure, which she was soon satisfied must be
that of a man. At times he rose to his full height; at times he cowered
downwards amongst the bushes. That he was not merely seeking a retreat
became evident from this, that the best road for such a purpose lay
open to him in the opposite direction; that he was watching herself,
also, became probable from the way in which he seemed to regulate his
own motions by hers. At length, whilst Paulina hesitated, in some
perplexity whether to go forward or to retreat towards the porter's
lodge, he suddenly plunged into the thickest belt of shrubs, and left
the road clear. Paulina seized the moment, and, with a palpitating
heart, quickened her steps towards the cloister.

She had cleared about one half of the way without obstruction, when
suddenly a powerful grasp seized her by the shoulder.

"Stop, lady!" said a deep, coarse voice; "stop! I mean no harm. Perhaps
I bring your ladyship what will be welcome news."

"But why here?" exclaimed Paulina; "wherefore do you alarm me thus? 0,
heavens! your eyes are wild and fierce; say, is it money that you
want?"

"Perhaps I do. To the like of me, lady, you may be sure that money
never comes amiss; but that is not my errand. Here is what will make
all clear;" and, as he spoke, he thrust his hand into the huge pocket
within the horseman's cloak which enveloped him. Instead of the pistol
or dag, which Paulina anticipated, he drew forth a large packet,
carefully sealed. Paulina felt so much relieved at beholding this
pledge of the man's pacific intentions, that she eagerly pressed her
purse into his hand, and was hastening to leave him, when the man
stopped her to deliver a verbal message from his master, requesting
earnestly that, if she concluded to keep the appointment arranged in
the letter, she would not be a minute later than the time fixed.

"And who," said Paulina, "is your master?"

"Surely, the general, madam--the young General Maximilian. Many a time
and oft have I waited on him when visiting your ladyship at the
Wartebrunn. But here I dare not show my face. Der Henker! if the
Landgrave knew that Michael Klotz was in Klosterheim, I reckon that all
the ladies in St. Agnes could not beg him a reprieve till to-morrow
morning!"

"Then, villain!" said the foremost of two men, who rushed hastily from
the adjoining shrubs, "be assured that the Landgrave does know it. Let
this be your warrant!" With these words he fired, and, immediately
after, his comrade. Whether the fugitive were wounded could not be
known; for he instantly plunged into the water, and, after two or three
moments, was heard upon the opposite margin. His pursuers seemed to
shrink from this attempt, for they divided and took the opposite
extremities of the pool, from the other bank of which they were soon
heard animating and directing each other through the darkness.

Paulina, confused and agitated, and anxious above all to examine her
letters, took the opportunity of a clear road, and fled in trepidation
to the convent.


CHAPTER XX.


The countess had brought home with her a double subject of anxiety. She
knew not to what result the Landgrave's purposes were tending; she
feared, also, from this sudden and new method of communication opened
with herself so soon after his previous letter, that some unexpected
bad fortune might now be threatening her lover. Hastily she tore open
the packet, which manifestly contained something larger than letters.
The first article which presented itself was a nun's veil, exactly on
the pattern of those worn by the nuns of St. Agnes. The accompanying
letter sufficiently explained its purpose.

It was in the handwriting, and bore the signature, of Maximilian. In a
few words he told her that a sudden communication, but from a quarter
entirely to be depended on, had reached him of a great danger impending
over her from the Landgrave; that, in the present submission of
Klosterheim to that prince's will, instant flight presented the sole
means of delivering her; for which purpose he would himself meet her in
disguise on the following morning, as early as four o'clock; or, if
that should prove impossible under the circumstances of the case, would
send a faithful servant; that one or other of them would attend at a
particular station, easily recognized by the description added, in a
ruinous part of the boundary wall, in the rear of the convent garden. A
large travelling cloak would be brought, to draw over the rest of her
dress; but meanwhile, as a means of passing unobserved through the
convent grounds, where the Landgrave's agents were continually watching
her motions, the nun's veil was almost indispensable. The other
circumstances of the journey would be communicated to her upon meeting.
In conclusion, the writer implored Paulina to suffer no scruples of
false delicacy to withhold her from a step which had so suddenly become
necessary to her preservation; and cautioned her particularly against
communicating her intentions to the lady abbess, whose sense of decorum
might lead her to urge advice at this moment inconsistent with her
safety.

Again and again did Paulina read this agitating letter; again and again
did she scrutinize the handwriting, apprehensive that she might be
making herself a dupe to some hidden enemy. The handwriting,
undoubtedly, had not all the natural freedom which characterized that
of Maximilian; it was somewhat stiff in its movement, but not more so
than that of his previous letter, in which he had accounted for the
slight change from a wound not perfectly healed in his right hand. In
other respects the letter seemed liable to no just suspicion. The
danger apprehended from the Landgrave tallied with her own knowledge.
The convent grounds were certainly haunted, as the letter alleged, by
the Landgrave's people; of that she had just received a convincing
proof; for, though the two strangers had turned off in pursuit of the
messenger who bore Maximilian's letter, yet doubtless their original
object of attention had been herself; they were then posted to watch
her motions, and they had avowed themselves in effect the Landgrave's
people. That part of the advice, again, which respected the lady
abbess, seemed judicious, on considering the character of that lady,
however much at first sight it might warrant some jealousy of the
writer's purposes to find him warning her against her best friends.
After all, what most disturbed the confidence of Paulina was the
countenance of the man who presented the letter. If this man were to be
the representative of Maximilian on the following morning, she felt,
and was persuaded that she would continue to feel, an invincible
repugnance to commit her safety to any such keeping. Upon the whole,
she resolved to keep the appointment, but to be guided in her further
conduct by circumstances as they should arise at the moment.

That night Paulina's favorite female attendant employed herself in
putting into as small a compass as possible the slender wardrobe which
they would be able to carry with them. The young countess herself spent
the hours in writing to the lady abbess and Sister Madeline,
acquainting them with all the circumstances of her interview with the
Landgrave, the certain grounds she had for apprehending some great
danger in that quarter, and the proposals so unexpectedly made to her
on the part of Maximilian for evading it. To ask that they should feel
no anxiety on her account, in times which made even a successful escape
from danger so very hazardous, she acknowledged would be vain; but, in
judging of the degree of prudence which she had exhibited on this
occasion, she begged them to reflect on the certain dangers which
awaited her from the Landgrave; and finally, in excuse for not having
sought the advice of so dear a friend as the lady abbess, she enclosed
the letter upon which she had acted.

These preparations were completed by midnight, after which Paulina
sought an hour or two of repose. At three o'clock were celebrated the
early matins, attended by the devouter part of the sisterhood, in the
chapel. Paulina and her maid took this opportunity for leaving their
chamber, and slipping unobserved amongst the crowd who were hurrying on
that summons into the cloisters. The organ was pealing solemnly through
the labyrinth of passages which led from the interior of the convent;
and Paulina's eyes were suffused with tears, as the gentler
recollections of her earlier days, and the peace which belongs to those
who have abjured this world and its treacherous promises, arose to her
mind, under the influence of the sublime music, in powerful contrast
with the tempestuous troubles of Germany--now become so comprehensive,
in their desolating sweep, as to involve even herself, and others of
station as elevated.


CHAPTER XXI.


The convent clock, chiming the quarters, at length announced that they
had reached the appointed hour. Trembling with fear and cold, though
muffled up in furs, Paulina and her attendant, with their nuns' veils
drawn over their head-dress, sallied forth into the garden. All was
profoundly dark, and overspread with the stillness of the grave. The
lights within the chapel threw a rich glow through the painted windows;
and here and there, from a few scattered casements in the vast pile of
St. Agnes, streamed a few weak rays from a taper or a lamp, indicating
the trouble of a sick bed, or the peace of prayer. But these rare
lights did but deepen the massy darkness of all beside; and Paulina,
with her attendant, had much difficulty in making her way to the
appointed station. Having reached the wall, however, they pursued its
windings, certain of meeting no important obstacles, until they
attained a part where their progress was impeded by frequent
dilapidations. Here they halted, and in low tones communicated their
doubts about the precise locality of the station indicated in the
letter, when suddenly a man started up from the ground, and greeted
them with the words "St. Agnes! all is right," which had been
preconcerted as the signal in the letter. This man was courteous and
respectful in his manner of speaking, and had nothing of the ruffian
voice which belonged to the bearer of the letter. In rapid terms he
assured Paulina that "the young general" had not found circumstances
favorable for venturing within the walls, but that he would meet her a
few miles beyond the city gates; and that at present they had no time
to lose. Saying this, he unshaded a dark lantern, which showed them a
ladder of ropes, attached to the summit of a wall, which at this point
was too low to occasion them much uneasiness or difficulty in
ascending. But Paulina insisted previously on hearing something more
circumstantial of the manner and style of their escape from the city
walls, and in what company their journey would be performed. The man
had already done something to conciliate Paulina's confidence by the
propriety of his address, which indicated a superior education, and
habits of intercourse with people of rank. He explained as much of the
plan as seemed necessary for the immediate occasion. A convoy of arms
and military stores was leaving the city for the post at Falkenstein.
Several carriages, containing privileged persons, to whom the Landgrave
or his minister had granted a license, were taking the benefit of an
escort over the forest; and a bribe in the proper quarter had easily
obtained permission, from the officer on duty at the gates, to suffer
an additional carriage to pass as one in a great lady's suite, on the
simple condition that it should contain none but females; as persons of
that sex were liable to no suspicion of being fugitives from the wrath
which was now supposed ready to descend upon the conspirators against
the Landgrave.

This explanation reconciled Paulina to the scheme. She felt cheered by
the prospect of having other ladies to countenance the mode of her
nocturnal journey; and at the worst, hearing this renewed mention of
conspirators and punishment, which easily connected itself with all
that had passed in her interview with the Landgrave, she felt assured,
at any rate, that the dangers she fled from transcended any which she
was likely to incur on her route. Her determination was immediately
taken. She passed over the wall with her attendant; and they found
themselves in a narrow lane, close to the city walls, with none but a
few ruinous outhouses on either side. A low whistle from the man was
soon answered by the rumbling of wheels; and from some distance, as it
seemed, a sort of caleche advanced, drawn by a pair of horses. Paulina
and her attendant stepped hastily in, for at the very moment when the
carriage drew up a signal-gun was heard; which, as their guide assured
them, proclaimed that the escort and the whole train of carriages were
at that moment defiling from the city gate. The driver, obeying the
directions of the other man, drove off as rapidly as the narrow road
and the darkness would allow. A few turns brought them into the great
square in front of the _schloss_; from which a few more open
streets, traversed at full gallop, soon brought them into the rear of
the convoy, which had been unexpectedly embarrassed in its progress to
the gate. From the rear, by dexterous management, they gradually
insinuated themselves into the centre; and, contrary to their
expectations, amongst the press of baggage-wagons, artillery, and
travelling equipages, all tumultuously clamoring to push on, as the
best chance of evading Holkerstein in the forest, their own
unpretending vehicle passed without other notice than a curse from the
officer on duty; which, however, they could not presume to appropriate,
as it might be supposed equitably distributed amongst all who stopped
the road at the moment.

Paulina shuddered as she looked out upon the line of fierce faces,
illuminated by the glare of torches, and mingling with horses' heads,
and the gleam of sabres; all around her, the roar of artillery wheels;
above her head the vast arch of the gates, its broad massy shadows
resting below; and in the vista beyond, which the archway defined, a
mass of blackness, in which she rather imagined than saw the
interminable solitudes of the forest. Soon the gate was closed; their
own carriage passed the tardier parts of the convoy; and, with a dozen
or two of others, surrounded by a squadron of dragoons, headed the
train. Happy beyond measure at the certainty that she had now cleared
the gates of Klosterheim, that she was in the wide, open forest, free
from a detested tyrant, and on the same side of the gates as her lover,
who was doubtless advancing to meet her, she threw herself back in her
carriage, and resigned herself to a slumber, which the anxieties and
watchings of the night had made more than usually welcome.  The city
clocks were now heard in the forest, solemnly knelling out the hour of
four. Hardly, however, had Paulina slept an hour, when she was gently
awaked by her attendant, who had felt it to be her duty to apprise her
lady of the change which had occurred in their situation. They had
stopped, it seemed, to attach a pair of leaders to their wheel-horses,
and were now advancing at a thundering pace, separated from the rest of
the convoy, and surrounded by a small escort of cavalry. The darkness
was still intense; and the lights of Klosterheim, which the frequent
windings of the road brought often into view, were at this moment
conspicuously seen. The castle, from its commanding position, and the
Convent of St. Agnes, were both easily traced out by means of the
lights gleaming from their long ranges of upper windows. A particular
turret, which sprung to an almost aerial altitude above the rest of the
building, in which it was generally reported that the Landgrave slept,
was more distinguishable than any other part of Klosterheim, from one
brilliant lustre which shot its rays through a large oriel window.
There at this moment was sleeping that unhappy prince, tyrannical and
self-tormenting, whose unmanly fears had menaced her own innocence with
so much indefinite danger; whom, in escaping, she knew not if she
_had_ escaped; and whose snares, as a rueful misgiving began to
suggest, were perhaps gathering faster about her, with every echo which
the startled forest returned to the resounding tread of their flying
cavalcade. She leaned back again in the carriage; again she fell
asleep; again she dreamed. But her sleep was un-refreshing; her dreams
were agitated, confused, and haunted by terrific images. And she awoke
repeatedly with her cheerful anticipation continually decaying of
speedily (perhaps ever again) rejoining her gallant Maximilian. There
was indeed yet a possibility that she might be under the superintending
care of her lover. But she secretly felt that she was betrayed. And she
wept when she reflected that her own precipitance had facilitated the
accomplishment of the plot which had perhaps forever ruined her
happiness.


CHAPTER XXII.


Meantime, Paulina awoke from the troubled slumbers into which her
fatigues had thrown her, to find herself still flying along as rapidly
as four powerful horses could draw their light burden, and still
escorted by a considerable body of the Landgrave's dragoons. She was
undoubtedly separated from all the rest of the convoy with whom she had
left Klosterheim. It was now apparent, even to her humble attendant,
that they were betrayed; and Paulina reproached herself with having
voluntarily cooperated with her enemy's stratagems. Certainly the
dangers from which she fled were great and imminent; yet still, in
Klosterheim, she derived some protection from the favor of the lady
abbess. That lady had great powers of a legal nature throughout the
city, and still greater influence with a Roman Catholic populace at
this particular period, when their prince had laid himself open to
suspicions of favoring Protestant allies; and Paulina bitterly bewailed
the imprudence which, in removing her from the Convent of St. Agnes,
had removed her from her only friends.

It was about noon when the party halted at a solitary house for rest
and refreshments. Paulina had heard nothing of the route which they had
hitherto taken, nor did she find it easy to collect, from the short and
churlish responses of her escort to the few questions she had yet
ventured to propose, in what direction their future advance would
proceed. A hasty summons bade her alight; and a few steps, under the
guidance of a trooper, brought her into a little gloomy wainscoted
room, where some refreshments had been already spread upon a table.
Adjoining was a small bed-room. And she was desired, with something
more civility than she had yet experienced, to consider both as
allotted for the use of herself and servant during the time of their
stay, which was expected, however, not to exceed the two or three hours
requisite for resting the horses.

But that was an arrangement which depended as much upon others as
themselves. And, in fact, a small party, whom the main body of the
escort had sent on to patrol the roads in advance, soon returned with
the unwelcome news that a formidable corps of imperialists were out
reconnoitring in a direction which might probably lead them across
their own line of march, in the event of their proceeding instantly.
The orders already issued for advance were therefore countermanded; and
a resolution was at length adopted by the leader of the party for
taking up their abode during the night in their present very tolerable
quarters.

Paulina, wearied and dejected, and recoiling naturally from the
indefinite prospects of danger before her, was not the least rejoiced
at this change in the original plan, by which she benefited at any rate
to the extent of a quiet shelter for one night more,--a blessing which
the next day's adventures might deny her,--and still more by that
postponement of impending evil which is so often welcome to the very
firmest minds, when exhausted by toil and affliction. Having this
certainty, however, of one night's continuance in her present abode,
she requested to have the room made a little more comfortable by the
exhilarating blaze of a fire. For this indulgence there were the
principal requisites in a hearth and spacious chimney. And an aged
crone, probably the sole female servant upon the premises, speedily
presented herself with a plentiful supply of wood, and the two
supporters, or _andirons_ (as they were formerly called), for
raising the billets so as to allow the air to circulate from below.
There was some difficulty at first in kindling the wood; and the old
servant resorted once or twice, after some little apologetic muttering
of doubts with herself, to a closet, containing, as Paulina could
observe, a considerable body of papers.

The fragments which she left remained strewed upon the ground; and
Paulina, taking them up with a careless air, was suddenly transfixed
with astonishment on observing that they were undoubtedly in a
handwriting familiar to her eye--the handwriting of the most
confidential amongst the imperial secretaries. Other recollections now
rapidly associated themselves together, which led her hastily to open
the closet door; and there, as she had already half expected, she saw
the travelling mail stolen from her own carriage, its lock forced, and
the remaining contents (for everything bearing a money value had
probably vanished on its first disappearance) lying in confusion.
Having made this discovery, she hastily closed the door of the closet,
resolved to prosecute her investigations in the night-time; but at
present, when she was liable to continual intrusions, to give no
occasion for those suspicions, which, once aroused, might end in
baffling her design.

Meantime, she occupied herself in conjectures upon the particular
course of accident which could have brought the trunk and papers into
the situation where she had been fortunate enough to find them. And,
with the clue already in her possession, she was not long in making
another discovery. She had previously felt some dim sense of
recognition, as her eyes wandered over the room, but had explained it
away into some resemblance to one or other of the many strange scenes
which she had passed through since leaving Vienna. But now, on
retracing the furniture and aspect of the two rooms, she was struck
with her own inattention, in not having sooner arrived at the discovery
that it was their old quarters of Waldenhausen, the very place in which
the robbery had been effected, where they had again the prospect of
spending the night, and of recovering in part the loss she had
sustained.

Midnight came, and the Lady Paulina prepared to avail herself of her
opportunities. She drew out the parcel of papers, which was large and
miscellaneous in its contents. By far the greater part, as she was
happy to observe, were mere copies of originals in the chancery at
Vienna; those related to the civic affairs of Klosterheim, and were
probably of a nature not to have been acted upon during the
predominance of the Swedish interest in the counsels and administration
of that city. With the revival of the imperial cause, no doubt these
orders would be repeated, and with the modifications which new
circumstances and the progress of events would then have rendered
expedient. This portion of the papers, therefore, Paulina willingly
restored to their situation in the closet. No evil would arise to any
party from their present detention in a place where they were little
likely to attract notice from anybody but the old lady in her
ministries upon the fire. Suspicion would be also turned aside from
herself in appropriating the few papers which remained. These contained
too frequent mention of a name dear to herself, not to have a
considerable value in her eyes; she was resolved, if possible, to carry
them off by concealing them within her bosom; but, at all events, in
preparation for any misfortune that might ultimately compel her to
resign them, she determined, without loss of time, to make herself
mistress of their contents.

One, and the most important of these documents, was a long and
confidential letter from the emperor to the town council and the chief
heads of conventual houses in Klosterheim. It contained a rapid summary
of the principal events in her lover's life, from his infancy, when
some dreadful domestic tragedy had thrown him upon the emperor's
protection, to his present period of early manhood, when his own sword
and distinguished talents had raised him to a brilliant name and a high
military rank in the imperial service. What were the circumstances of
that tragedy, as a case sufficiently well known to those whom he
addressed, or to be collected from accompanying papers, the emperor did
not say. But he lavished every variety of praise upon Maximilian, with
a liberality that won tears of delight from the solitary young lady, as
she now sat at midnight looking over these gracious testimonies to her
lover's merit. A theme so delightful to Paulina could not be
unseasonable at any time; and never did her thoughts revert to him more
fondly than at this moment, when she so much needed his protecting arm.
Yet the emperor, she was aware, must have some more special motive for
enlarging upon this topic than his general favor to Maximilian. What
this could be, in a case so closely connecting the parties to the
correspondence on both sides with Klosterheim, a little interested her
curiosity. And, on looking more narrowly at the accompanying documents,
in one which had been most pointedly referred to by the emperor she
found some disclosures on the subject of her lover's early misfortunes,
which, whilst they filled her with horror and astonishment, elevated
the natural pretensions of Maximilian in point of birth and descent
more nearly to a level with the splendor of his self-created
distinctions; and thus crowned him, who already lived in her
apprehension as the very model of a hero, with the only advantages that
he had ever been supposed to want--the interest which attaches to
unmerited misfortunes, and the splendor of an illustrious descent.

As she thus sat, absorbed in the story of her lover's early
misfortunes, a murmuring sound of talking attracted her ear, apparently
issuing from the closet. Hastily throwing open the door, she found that
a thin wooden partition, veined with numerous chinks, was the sole
separation between the closet and an adjoining bed-room. The words were
startling, incoherent, and at times raving. Evidently they proceeded
from some patient stretched on a bed of sickness, and dealing with a
sort of horrors in his distempered fancy, worse, it was to be hoped,
than any which the records of his own remembrance could bring before
him. Sometimes he spoke in the character of one who chases a deer in a
forest; sometimes he was close upon the haunches of his game; sometimes
it seemed on the point of escaping him. Then the nature of the game
changed utterly, and became something human; and a companion was
suddenly at his side. With him he quarrelled fiercely about their share
in the pursuit and capture. "O, my lord, you must not deny it. Look,
look! your hands are bloodier than mine. Fie! fie! is there no running
water in the forest?--So young as he is, and so noble!--Stand off! he
will cover us all with his blood!--O, what a groan was that! It will
have broke somebody's heart-strings, I think! It would have broken mine
when I was younger. But these wars make us all cruel. Yet you are worse
than I am."

Then again, after a pause, the patient seemed to start up in bed, and
he cried out, convulsively, "Give me my share, I say. Wherefore must my
share be so small? There he comes past again. Now strike--now, now,
now! Get his head down, my lord.--He's off, by G--! Now, if he gets out
of the forest, two hours will take him to Vienna. And we must go to
Rome: where else could we get absolution? 0, Heavens! the forest is
full of blood; well may our hands be bloody. I see flowers all the way
to Vienna: but there is blood below: 0, what a depth! what a depth!--O!
heart, heart!--See how he starts up from his lair!--O! your highness
has deceived me! There are a thousand upon one man!"

In such terms he continued to rave, until Paulina's mind was so much
harassed with the constant succession of dreadful images and frenzied
ejaculations, all making report of a life passed in scenes of horror,
bloodshed, and violence, that at length, for her own relief, she was
obliged to close the door; through which, however, at intervals,
piercing shrieks or half-stifled curses still continued to find their
way. It struck her as a remarkable coincidence, that something like a
slender thread of connection might be found between the dreadful story
narrated in the imperial document, and the delirious ravings of this
poor, wretched creature, to whom accident had made her a neighbor for a
single night.

Early the next morning Paulina and her servant were summoned to resume
their journey; and three hours more of rapid travelling brought them to
the frowning fortress of Lovenstein. Their escort, with any one of whom
they had found but few opportunities of communicating, had shown
themselves throughout gloomy and obstinately silent. They knew not,
therefore, to what distance their journey extended. But, from the
elaborate ceremonies with which they were here received, and the formal
receipt for their persons, which was drawn up and delivered by the
governor to the officer commanding their escort, Paulina judged that
the castle of Lovenstein would prove to be their final destination.


CHAPTER XXIII.


Two days elapsed without any change in Paulina's situation, as she
found it arranged upon her first arrival at Lovenstein. Her rooms were
not incommodious; but the massy barricades at the doors, the grated
windows, and the sentinels who mounted guard upon all the avenues which
led to her apartments, satisfied her sufficiently that she was a
prisoner.

The third morning after her arrival brought her a still more unwelcome
proof of this melancholy truth, in the summons which she received to
attend a court of criminal justice on the succeeding day, connected
with the tenor of its language. Her heart died within her as she found
herself called upon to answer as a delinquent on a charge of
treasonable conspiracy with various members of the university of
Klosterheim, against the sovereign prince, the Landgrave of X----.
Witnesses in exculpation, whom could she produce? Or how defend herself
before a tribunal where all alike--judge, evidence, accuser---were in
effect one and the same malignant enemy? In what way she could have
come to be connected in the Landgrave's mind with a charge of treason
against his princely rights, she found it difficult to explain, unless
the mere fact of having carried the imperial despatches in the trunks
about her carriages were sufficient to implicate her as a secret
emissary or agent concerned in the imperial diplomacy. But she strongly
suspected that some deep misapprehension existed in the Landgrave's
mind; and its origin, she fancied, might be found in the refined
knavery of their ruffian host at Waldenhausen, in making his market of
the papers which he had purloined. Bringing them forward separately and
by piecemeal, he had probably hoped to receive so many separate
rewards. But, as it would often happen that one paper was necessary in
the way of explanation to another, and the whole, perhaps, were almost
essential to the proper understanding of any one, the result would
inevitably be grievously to mislead the Landgrave. Further
communications, indeed, would have tended to disabuse the prince of any
delusions raised in this way. But it was probable, as Paulina had
recently learned in passing through Waldenhausen, that the ruffian's
illness and delirium had put a stop to any further communication of
papers; and thus the misconceptions which he had caused were
perpetuated in the Landgrave's mind.

It was on the third day after Paulina's arrival that she was first
placed before the court. The presiding officer in this tribunal was the
governor of the fortress, a tried soldier, but a ruffian of low habits
and cruel nature. He had risen under the Landgrave's patronage, as an
adventurer of desperate courage, ready for any service, however
disreputable, careless alike of peril or of infamy. In common with many
partisan officers, who had sprung from the ranks in this adventurous
war, seeing on every side and in the highest quarters, princes as well
as supreme commanders, the uttermost contempt of justice and moral
principle, he had fought his way to distinction and fortune, through
every species of ignoble cruelty. He had passed from service to
service, as he saw an opening for his own peculiar interest or merit,
everywhere valued as a soldier of desperate enterprise, everywhere
abhorred as a man.

By birth a Croatian, he had exhibited himself as one of the most savage
leaders of that order of barbarians in the sack of Magdeburgh, where he
served under Tilly; but, latterly, he had taken service again under his
original patron, the Landgrave, who had lured him back to his interest
by the rank of general and the governorship of Lovenstein.

This brutal officer, who had latterly lived in a state of continual
intoxication, was the judge before whom the lovely and innocent Paulina
was now arraigned on a charge affecting her life. In fact, it became
obvious that the process was not designed for any other purpose than to
save appearances, and, if that should seem possible, to extract further
discoveries from the prisoner. The general acted as supreme arbiter in
every question of rights and power that arose to the court in the
administration of their almost unlimited functions. Doubts he allowed
of none; and cut every knot of jurisprudence, whether form or
substance, by his Croatian sabre. Two assessors, however, he willingly
received upon his bench of justice, to relieve him from the fatigue and
difficulty of conducting a perplexed examination.

These assessors were lawyers of a low class, who tempered the exercise
of their official duties with as few scruples of justice, and as little
regard to the restraints of courtesy, as their military principal. The
three judges were almost equally ferocious, and tools equally abject of
the unprincipled sovereign whom they served.

A sovereign, however, he was; and Paulina was well aware that in his
own states he had the power of life and death. She had good reason to
see that her own death was resolved on; still she neglected no means of
honorable self-defence. In a tone of mingled sweetness and dignity she
maintained her innocence of all that was alleged against her; protested
that she was unacquainted with the tenor of any papers which might have
been found in her trunks; and claimed her privilege, as a subject of
the emperor, in bar of all right on the Landgrave's part to call her to
account. These pleas were overruled, and when she further acquainted
the court that she was a near relative of the emperor's, and ventured
to hint at the vengeance with which his imperial majesty would not fail
to visit so bloody a contempt of justice, she was surprised to find
this menace treated with mockery and laughter. In reality, the long
habit of fighting for and against all the princes of Germany had given
to the Croatian general a disregard for any of them, except on the
single consideration of receiving his pay at the moment; and a single
circumstance, unknown to Paulina, in the final determination of the
Landgrave, to earn a merit with his Swedish allies by breaking off all
terms of reserve and compromise with the imperial court, impressed a
savage desperation on the tone of that prince's policy at this
particular time. The Landgrave had resolved to stake his all upon a
single throw. A battle was now expected, which, if favorable to the
Swedes, would lay open the road to Vienna. The Landgrave was prepared
to abide the issue; not, perhaps, wholly uninfluenced to so extreme a
course by the very paper which had been robbed from Paulina. His policy
was known to his agents, and conspicuously influenced their manner of
receiving her menace.

Menaces, they informed her, came with better grace from those who had
the power to enforce them; and, with a brutal scoff, the Croatian bade
her merit their indulgence by frank discoveries and voluntary
confessions. He insisted on knowing the nature of the connection which
the imperial colonel of horse, Maximilian, had maintained with the
students of Klosterheim; and upon other discoveries, with respect to
most of which Paulina was too imperfectly informed herself to be
capable of giving any light. Her earnest declarations to this effect
were treated with disregard. She was dismissed for the present, but
with an intimation that on the morrow she must prepare herself with a
more complying temper, or with a sort of firmness in maintaining her
resolution, which would not, perhaps, long resist those means which the
law had placed at their disposal for dealing with the refractory and
obstinate.


CHAPTER XXIII.


Paulina meditated earnestly upon the import of this parting threat. The
more she considered it, the less could she doubt that these fierce
inquisitors had meant to threaten her with torture. She felt the whole
indignity of such a threat, though she could hardly bring herself to
believe them in earnest.

On the following morning she was summoned early before her judges. They
had not yet assembled; but some of the lower officials were pacing up
and down, exchanging unintelligible jokes, looking sometimes at
herself, sometimes at an iron machine, with a complex arrangement of
wheels and screws. Dark were the suspicions which assaulted Paulina as
this framework or couch of iron first met her eyes; and perhaps some of
the jests circulating amongst the brutal ministers of her brutal judges
would have been intelligible enough, had she condescended to turn her
attention in that direction. Meantime her doubts were otherwise
dispersed. The Croatian officer now entered the room alone, his
assessors having probably declined participation in that part of the
horrid functions which remained under the Landgrave's commission.

This man, presenting a paper with a long list of interrogatories to
Paulina, bade her now rehearse verbally the sum of the answers which
she designed to give. Running rapidly through them, Paulina replied,
with dignity, yet trembling and agitated, that these were questions
which in any sense she could not answer; many of them referring to
points on which she had no knowledge, and none of them being consistent
with the gratitude and friendship so largely due on her side to the
persons implicated in the bearing of these questions.

"Then you refuse?"

"Certainly; there are three questions only which it is in my power to
answer at all--even these imperfectly. Answers such as you expect would
load me with dishonor."

"Then you refuse?"

"For the reasons I have stated, undoubtedly I do."

"Once more--you refuse?"

"I refuse, certainly; but do me the justice to record my reasons."

"Reasons!--ha! ha! they had need to be strong ones if they will hold
out against the arguments of this pretty plaything," laying his hand
upon the machine. "However, the choice is yours, not mine."

So saying, he made a sign to the attendants. One began to move the
machine, and work the screws, or raise the clanking grates and
framework, with a savage din; two others bared their arms. Paulina
looked on motionless with sudden horror, and palpitating with fear.

The Croatian nodded to the men; and then, in a loud, commanding voice,
exclaimed: "The question in the first degree!"

At this moment Paulina recovered her strength, which the first panic
had dispelled. She saw a man approach her with a ferocious grin of
exultation. Another, with the same horrid expression of countenance,
carried a large vase of water.

The whole indignity of the scene flashed full upon her mind. She, a
lady of the imperial house, threatened with torture by the base agent
of a titled ruffian! She, who owed him no duty,--had violated no claim
of hospitality, though in her own person all had been atrociously
outraged!

Thoughts like these flew rapidly through her brain, when suddenly a
door opened behind her. It was an attendant with some implements for
tightening or relaxing bolts. The bare-armed ruffian at this moment
raised his arm to seize hers. Shrinking from the pollution of his
accursed touch, Paulina turned hastily round, darted through the open
door, and fled, like a dove pursued by vultures, along the passages
which stretched before her. Already she felt their hot breathing upon
her neck, already the foremost had raised his hand to arrest her, when
a sudden turn brought her full upon a band of young women, tending upon
one of superior rank, manifestly their mistress.

"0, madam!" exclaimed Paulina, "save me! save me!" and with these words
fell exhausted at the lady's feet.

This female--young, beautiful, and with a touching pensiveness of
manners--raised her tenderly in her arms, and with a sisterly tone of
affection bade her fear nothing; and the respectful manner in which the
officials retired at her command satisfied Paulina that she stood in
some very near relation to the Landgrave,--in reality, she soon spoke
of him as her father. "Is it possible," thought Paulina to herself,
"that this innocent and lovely child (for she was not more than
seventeen, though with a prematurity of womanly person that raised her
to a level with Paulina's height) should owe the affection of a
daughter to a tyrant so savage as the Landgrave?"

She found, however, that the gentle Princess Adeline owed to her own
childlike simplicity the best gift that one so situated could have
received from the bounty of Heaven. The barbarities exercised by the
Croatian governor she charged entirely upon his own brutal nature; and
so confirmed was she in this view by Paulina's own case, that she now
resolved upon executing a resolution she had long projected. Her
father's confidence was basely abused; this she said, and devoutly
believed. "No part of the truth ever reached him; her own letters
remained disregarded in a way which was irreconcilable with the
testimonies of profound affection to herself, daily showered upon her
by his highness."

In reality, this sole child of the Landgrave was also the one sole
jewel that gave a value in his eyes to his else desolate life.
Everything in and about the castle of Lovenstein was placed under her
absolute control; even the brutal Croatian governor knew that no plea
or extremity of circumstances would atone for one act of disobedience
to her orders; and hence it was that the ministers of this tyrant
retired with so much prompt obedience to her commands.

Experience, however, had taught the princess that, not unfrequently,
orders apparently obeyed were afterwards secretly evaded; and the
disregard paid of late to her letters of complaint satisfied her that
they were stifled and suppressed by the governor. Paulina, therefore,
whom a few hours of unrestrained intercourse had made interesting to
her heart, she would not suffer even to sleep apart from herself. Her
own agitation on the poor prisoner's behalf became greater even than
that of Paulina; and as fresh circumstances of suspicion daily arose in
the savage governor's deportment, she now took in good earnest those
measures for escape to Klosterheim which she had long arranged. In this
purpose she was greatly assisted by the absolute authority which her
father had conceded to her over everything but the mere military
arrangements in the fortress. Under the color of an excursion, such as
she had been daily accustomed to take, she found no difficulty in
placing Paulina, sufficiently disguised, amongst her own servants. At a
proper point of the road, Paulina and a few attendants, with the
princess herself, issued from their coaches, and, bidding them await
their return in half an hour's interval, by that time were far advanced
upon their road to the military post of Falkenberg.


CHAPTER XXIV.


In twenty days the mysterious Masque had summoned the Landgrave "to
answer for crimes unatoned, before a tribunal where no power but that
of innocence could avail him." These days were nearly expired. The
morning of the twentieth had arrived.

There were two interpretations of this summons. By many it was believed
that the tribunal contemplated was that of the emperor; and that, by
some mysterious plot, which could not be more difficult of execution
than others which had actually been accomplished by The Masque, on this
day the Landgrave would be carried off to Vienna. Others, again,
understanding by the tribunal, in the same sense, the imperial chamber
of criminal justice, believed it possible to fulfil the summons in some
way less liable to delay or uncertainty than by a long journey to
Vienna, through a country beset with enemies. But a third party,
differing from both the others, understood by the tribunal where
innocence was the only shield the judgment-seat of heaven; and believed
that on this day justice would be executed on the Landgrave, for crimes
known and unknown, by a public and memorable death. Under any
interpretation, however, nobody amongst the citizens could venture
peremptorily to deny, after the issue of the masqued ball, and of so
many other public denunciations, that The Masque would keep his word to
the letter.

It followed, of necessity, that everybody was on the tiptoe of
suspense, and that the interest hanging upon the issue of this night's
events swallowed up all other anxieties, of whatsoever nature. Even the
battle which was now daily expected between the imperial and Swedish
armies ceased to occupy the hearts and conversation of the citizens.
Domestic and public concerns alike gave way to the coming catastrophe
so solemnly denounced by The Masque.

The Landgrave alone maintained a gloomy reserve, and the expression of
a haughty disdain. He had resolved to meet the summons with the
liveliest expression of defiance, by fixing this evening for a second
masqued ball, upon a greater scale than the first. In doing this he
acted advisedly, and with the counsel of his Swedish allies. They
represented to him that the issue of the approaching battle might be
relied upon as pretty nearly certain; all the indications were indeed
generally thought to promise a decisive turn in their favor; but, in
the worst case, no defeat of the Swedish army in this war had ever been
complete; that the bulk of the retreating army, if the Swedes should be
obliged to retreat, would take the road to Klosterheim, and would
furnish to himself a garrison capable of holding the city for many
months to come (and _that_ would not fail to bring many fresh
chances to all of them), whilst to his new and cordial allies this
course would offer a secure retreat from pursuing enemies, and a
satisfactory proof of his own fidelity. This even in the worst case;
whereas in the better and more probable one, of a victory to the
Swedes, to maintain the city but for a day or two longer against
internal conspirators, and the secret cooperators outside, would be in
effect to ratify any victory which the Swedes might gain by putting
into their hands at a critical moment one of its most splendid trophies
and guarantees.

These counsels fell too much into the Landgrave's own way of thinking
to meet with any demurs from him. It was agreed, therefore, that as
many Swedish troops as could at this important moment be spared should
be introduced into the halls and saloons of the castle, on the eventful
evening, disguised as masquers. These were about four hundred; and
other arrangements were made, equally mysterious, and some of them
known only to the Landgrave.

At seven o'clock, as on the former occasion, the company began to
assemble. The same rooms were thrown open; but, as the party was now
far more numerous, and was made more comprehensive in point of rank, in
order to include all who were involved in the conspiracy which had been
some time maturing in Klosterheim, fresh suites of rooms were judged
necessary, on the pretext of giving fuller effect to the princely
hospitalities of the Landgrave. And, on this occasion, according to an
old privilege conceded in the case of coronations or galas of
magnificence, by the lady abbess of St. Agnes, the partition walls were
removed between the great hall of the _schloss_ and the refectory
of that immense convent; so that the two vast establishments, which on
one side were contiguous to each other, were thus laid into one.

The company had now continued to pour in for two hours. The palace and
the refectory of the convent were now overflowing with lights and
splendid masques; the avenues and corridors rang with music; and,
though every heart was throbbing with fear and suspense, no outward
expression was wanting of joy and festal pleasure. For the present, all
was calm around the slumbering volcano.

Suddenly, the Count St. Aldenheim, who was standing with arms folded,
and surveying the brilliant scene, felt some one touch his hand, in the
way concerted amongst the conspirators as a private signal of
recognition. He turned, and recognized his friend the Baron Adelort,
who saluted him with three emphatic words--"We are betrayed!"--Then,
after a pause, "Follow me."

St. Aldenheim made his way through the glittering crowds, and pressed
after his conductor into one of the most private corridors.

"Fear not," said the other, "that we shall be watched. Vigilance is no
longer necessary to our crafty enemy. He has already triumphed. Every
avenue of escape is barred and secured against us; every outlet of the
palace is occupied by the Landgrave's troops. Not a man of us will
return alive."

"Heaven forbid we should prove ourselves such gulls! You are but
jesting, my friend."

"Would to God I were! my information is but too certain. Something I
have overheard by accident; something has been told me; and something I
have seen. Come you, also, count, and see what I will show you: then
judge for yourself."

So saying, he led St. Aldenheim by a little circuit of passages to a
doorway, through which they passed into a hall of vast proportions; to
judge by the catafalques, and mural monuments, scattered at intervals
along the vast expanse of its walls, this seemed to be the ante-chapel
of St. Agnes. In fact it was so; a few faint lights glimmered through
the gloomy extent of this immense chamber, placed (according to the
Catholic rite) at the shrine of the saint. Feeble as it was, however,
the light was powerful enough to display in the centre a pile of
scaffolding covered with black drapery. Standing at the foot, they
could trace the outlines of a stage at the summit, fenced in with a
railing, a block, and the other apparatus for the solemnity of a public
execution, whilst the saw-dust below their feet ascertained the spot in
which the heads were to fall.

"Shall we ascend and rehearse our parts?" asked the count: "for
methinks everything is prepared, except the headsman and the
spectators. A plague on the inhospitable knave!"

"Yes, St. Aldenheim, all is prepared--even to the sufferers. On that
list you stand foremost. Believe me, I speak with knowledge; no matter
where gained. It is certain."

"Well, _necessitas non habet legem_; and he that dies on Tuesday
will never catch cold on Wednesday. But, still, that comfort is
something of the coldest. Think you that none better could be had?"

"As how?"

"Revenge, _par exemple_; a little revenge. Might one not screw the
neck of this base prince, who abuses the confidence of cavaliers so
perfidiously? To die I care not; but to be caught in a trap, and die
like a rat lured by a bait of toasted cheese--Faugh! my countly blood
rebels against it!"

"Something might surely be done, if we could muster in any strength.
That is, we might die sword in hand; but--"

"Enough! I ask no more. Now let us go. We will separately pace the
rooms, draw together as many of our party as we can single out, and
then proclaim ourselves. Let each answer for one victim. I'll take his
highness for my share."

With this purpose, and thus forewarned of the dreadful fate at hand,
they left the gloomy ante-chapel, traversed the long suite of
entertaining rooms, and collected as many as could easily be detached
from the dances without too much pointing out their own motions to the
attention of all present. The Count St. Aldenheim was seen rapidly
explaining to them the circumstances of their dreadful situation;
whilst hands uplifted, or suddenly applied to the hilt of the sword,
with other gestures of sudden emotion, expressed the different
impressions of rage or fear, which, under each variety of character,
impressed the several hearers. Some of them, however, were too
unguarded in their motions; and the energy of their gesticulations had
now begun to attract the attention of the company.

The Landgrave himself had his eye upon them. But at this moment his
attention was drawn off by an uproar of confusion in an ante-chamber,
which argued some tragical importance in the cause that could prompt so
sudden a disregard for the restraints of time and place.


CHAPTER XXV.


His highness issued from the room in consternation, followed by many of
the company. In the very centre of the ante-room, booted and spurred,
bearing all the marks of extreme haste, panic, and confusion, stood a
Swedish officer, dealing forth hasty fragments of some heart-shaking
intelligence. "All is lost!" said he; "not a regiment has escaped!"
"And the place?" exclaimed a press of inquirers. "Nordlingen." "And
which way has the Swedish army retreated?" demanded a masque behind
him.

"Retreat!" retorted the officer, "I tell you there is no retreat. All
have perished. The army is no more. Horse, foot, artillery--all is
wrecked, crushed, annihilated. Whatever yet lives is in the power of
the imperialists."

At this moment the Landgrave came up, and in every way strove to check
these too liberal communications. He frowned; the officer saw him not.
He laid his hand on the officer's arm, but all in vain. He spoke, but
the officer knew not, or forgot his rank. Panic and immeasurable sorrow
had crushed his heart; he cared not for restraints; decorum and
ceremony were become idle words. The Swedish army had perished. The
greatest disaster of the whole 'Thirty Years' War had fallen upon his
countrymen. His own eyes had witnessed the tragedy, and he had no power
to check or restrain that which made his heart overflow.

The Landgrave retired. But in half an hour the banquet was announced;
and his highness had so much command over his own feelings that he took
his seat at the table. He seemed tranquil in the midst of general
agitation; for the company were distracted by various passions. Some
exulted in the great victory of the imperialists, and the approaching
liberation of Klosterheim. Some, who were in the secret, anticipated
with horror the coming tragedy of vengeance upon his enemies which the
Landgrave had prepared for this night. Some were filled with suspense
and awe on the probable fulfilment in some way or other, doubtful as to
the mode, but tragic (it was not doubted) for the result, of The
Masque's mysterious denunciation.

      *       *       *       *       *

Under such circumstances of universal agitation and suspense,--for on
one side or other it seemed inevitable that this night must produce a
tragical catastrophe,--it was not extraordinary that silence and
embarrassment should at one moment take possession of the company, and
at another that kind of forced and intermitting gayety which still more
forcibly proclaimed the trepidation which really mastered the spirits
of the assemblage. The banquet was magnificent; but it moved heavily
and in sadness. The music, which broke the silence at intervals, was
animating and triumphant; but it had no power to disperse the gloom
which hung over the evening, and which was gathering strength
conspicuously as the hours advanced to midnight.

As the clock struck eleven, the orchestra had suddenly become silent;
and, as no buzz of conversation succeeded, the anxiety of expectation
became more painfully irritating. The whole vast assemblage was hushed,
gazing at the doors, at each other, or watching, stealthily, the
Landgrave's countenance. Suddenly a sound was heard in an ante-room; a
page entered with a step hurried and discomposed, advanced to the
Landgrave's seat, and, bending downwards, whispered some news or
message to that prince, of which not a syllable could be caught by the
company. Whatever were its import, it could not be collected, from any
very marked change on the features of him to whom it was addressed,
that he participated in the emotions of the messenger, which were
obviously those of grief or panic--perhaps of both united. Some even
fancied that a transient expression of malignant exultation crossed the
Landgrave's countenance at this moment. But, if that were so, it was
banished as suddenly; and, in the next instant, the prince arose with a
leisurely motion; and, with a very successful affectation (if such it
were) of extreme tranquillity, he moved forwards to one of the ante-
rooms, in which, as it now appeared, some person was awaiting his
presence.

Who, and on what errand? These were the questions which now racked the
curiosity of those among the company who had least concern in the final
event, and more painfully interested others, whose fate was consciously
dependent upon the accidents which the next hour might happen to bring
up. Silence still continuing to prevail, and, if possible, deeper
silence than before, it was inevitable that all the company, those even
whose honorable temper would least have brooked any settled purpose of
surprising the Landgrave's secrets, should, in some measure, become a
party to what was now passing in the ante-room.

The voice of the Landgrave was heard at times, briefly and somewhat
sternly in reply, but apparently in the tone of one who is thrown upon
the necessity of self-defence. On the other side, the speaker was
earnest, solemn, and (as it seemed) upon an office of menace or
upbraiding. For a time, however, the tones were low and subdued; but,
as the passion of the scene advanced, less restraint was observed on
both sides; and at length many believed that in the stranger's voice
they recognized that of the lady abbess; and it was some corroboration
of this conjecture, that the name of Paulina began now frequently to be
caught, and in connection with ominous words, indicating some dreadful
fate supposed to have befallen her.

A few moments dispersed all doubts. The tones of bitter and angry
reproach rose louder than before; they were, without doubt, those of
the abbess. She charged the blood of Paulina upon the Landgrave's head;
denounced the instant vengeance of the emperor for so great an
atrocity; and, if that could be evaded, bade him expect certain
retribution from Heaven for so wanton and useless an effusion of
innocent blood.

The Landgrave replied in a lower key; and his words were few and rapid.
That they were words of fierce recrimination, was easily collected from
the tone; and in the next minute the parties separated with little
ceremony (as was sufficiently evident) on either side, and with mutual
wrath. The Landgrave reentered the banqueting-room; his features
discomposed and inflated with passion; but such was his self-command,
and so habitual his dissimulation, that, by the time he reached his
seat, all traces of agitation had disappeared; his countenance had
resumed its usual expression of stern serenity, and his manners their
usual air of perfect self-possession.

       *       *       *       *       *

The clock of St. Agnes struck twelve. At that sound the Landgrave rose.
"Friends and illustrious strangers!" said he, "I have caused one seat
to be left empty for that blood-stained Masque, who summoned me to
answer on this night for a crime which he could not name, at a bar
which no man knows. His summons you heard. Its fulfilment is yet to
come. But I suppose few of us are weak enough to expect--"

"That The Masque of Klosterheim will ever break his engagements," said
a deep voice, suddenly interrupting the Landgrave. All eyes were
directed to the sound; and, behold! there stood The Masque, and seated
himself quietly in the chair which had been left vacant for his
reception.

"It is well!" said the Landgrave; but the air of vexation and panic
with which he sank back into his seat belied his words. Rising again,
after a pause, with some agitation, he said, "Audacious criminal! since
last we met, I have learned to know you, and to appreciate your
purposes. It is now fit they should be known to Klosterheim. A scene of
justice awaits you at present, which will teach this city to understand
the delusions which could build any part of her hopes upon yourself.
Citizens and friends, not I, but these dark criminals and interlopers
whom you will presently see revealed in their true colors, are
answerable for that interruption to the course of our peaceful
festivities, which will presently be brought before you. Not I, but
they are responsible."

So saying, the Landgrave arose, and the whole of the immense audience,
who now resumed their masques, and prepared to follow whither his
highness should lead. With the haste of one who fears he may be
anticipated in his purpose, and the fury of some bird of prey,
apprehending that his struggling victim may be yet torn from his
talons, the prince hurried onwards to the ante-chapel. Innumerable
torches now illuminated its darkness; in other respects it remained as
St. Aldenheim had left it.

The Swedish masques had many of them withdrawn from the gala on hearing
the dreadful day of Nordlingen. But enough remained, when strengthened
by the body-guard of the Landgrave, to make up a corps of nearly five
hundred men. Under the command of Colonel von Aremberg, part of them
now enclosed the scaffold, and part prepared to seize the persons who
were pointed out to them as conspirators. Amongst these stood foremost
The Masque.

Shaking off those who attempted to lay hands upon him, he strode
disdainfully within the ring; and then, turning to the Landgrave, he
said--

"Prince, for once be generous; accept me as a ransom for the rest."

The Landgrave smiled sarcastically. "That were an unequal bargain,
methinks, to take a part in exchange for the whole."

"The whole? And where is, then, your assurance of the whole?"

"Who should now make it doubtful? There is the block; the headsman is
at hand. What hand can deliver from this extremity even you, Sir
Masque?"

"That which has many times delivered me from a greater. It seems,
prince, that you forget the last days in the history of Klosterheim. He
that rules by night in Klosterheim may well expect a greater favor than
this when he descends to sue for it."

The Landgrave smiled contemptuously. "But, again I ask you, sir, will
you on any terms grant immunity to these young men?"

"You sue as vainly for others as you would do for yourself."

"Then all grace is hopeless?" The Landgrave vouchsafed no answer, but
made signals to Von Aremberg.

"Gentlemen, cavaliers, citizens of Klosterheim, you that are not
involved in the Landgrave's suspicions," said The Masque, appealingly,
"will you not join me in the intercession I offer for these young
friends, who are else to perish unjudged, by blank edict of martial
law?"

The citizens of Klosterheim interceded with ineffectual supplication.
"Gentlemen, you waste your breath; they die without reprieve," replied
the Landgrave.

"Will your highness spare none?"

"Not one," he exclaimed, angrily,--"not the youngest amongst them."

"Nor grant a day's respite to him who may appear, on examination, the
least criminal of the whole?"

"A day's respite? No, nor half an hour's. Headsman, be ready. Soldiers,
lay the heads of the prisoners ready for the axe."

"Detested prince, now look to your own!"

With a succession of passions flying over his face,--rage, disdain,
suspicion,--the Landgrave looked round upon The Masque as he uttered
these words, and, with pallid, ghastly consternation, beheld him raise
to his lips a hunting-horn which depended from his neck. He blew a
blast, which was immediately answered from within. Silence as of the
grave ensued. All eyes were turned in the direction of the answer.
Expectation was at its summit; and in less than a minute solemnly
uprose the curtain, which divided the chapel from the ante-chapel,
revealing a scene that smote many hearts with awe, and the consciences
of some with as much horror as if it had really been that final
tribunal which numbers believed The Masque to have denounced.


CHAPTER XXVI.


The great chapel of St. Agnes, the immemorial hall of coronation for
the Landgraves of X----, was capable of containing with ease from seven
to eight thousand spectators. Nearly that number was now collected in
the galleries, which, on the recurrence of that great occasion, or of a
royal marriage, were usually assigned to the spectators. These were all
equipped in burnished arms, the very _élite_ of the imperial army.
Resistance was hopeless; in a single moment the Landgrave saw himself
dispossessed of all his hopes by an overwhelming force; the advanced
guard, in fact, of the victorious imperialists, now fresh from
Nordlingen.

On the marble area of the chapel, level with their own position, were
arranged "a brilliant staff of officers; and, a little in advance of
them, so as almost to reach the ante-chapel, stood the imperial legate
or ambassador. This nobleman advanced to the crowd of Klosterheimers,
and spoke thus:

"Citizens of Klosterheim, I bring you from the emperor your true and
lawful Landgrave, Maximilian, son of your last beloved prince."

Both chapels resounded with acclamations; and the troops presented
arms.

"Show us our prince! let us pay him our homage!" echoed from every
mouth.

"This is mere treason!" exclaimed the usurper. "The emperor invites
treason against his own throne, who undermines that of other princes.
The late Landgrave had no son; so much is known to you all."

"None that was known to his murderer," replied The Masque, "else had he
met no better fate than his unhappy father."

"Murderer! And what art thou, blood-polluted Masque, with hands yet
reeking from the blood of all who refused to join the conspiracy
against your lawful prince?"

"Citizens of Klosterheim," said the legate, "first let the emperor's
friend be assoiled from all injurious thoughts. Those whom ye believe
to have been removed by murder are here to speak for themselves."

Upon this the whole line of those who had mysteriously disappeared from
Klosterheim presented themselves to the welcome of their astonished
friends.

"These," said the legate, "quitted Klosterheim, even by the same secret
passages which enabled us to enter it, and for the self-same purpose,--
to prepare the path for the restoration of the true heir, Maximilian
the Fourth, whom in this noble prince you behold, and whom may God long
preserve!"

Saying this, to the wonder of the whole assembly, he led forward The
Masque, whom nobody had yet suspected for more than an agent of the
true heir.

The Landgrave, meantime, thus suddenly denounced as a tyrant, usurper,
murderer, had stood aloof, and had given but a slight attention to the
latter words of the legate. A race of passions had traversed his
countenance, chasing each other in flying succession. But by a
prodigious effort he recalled himself to the scene before him; and,
striding up to the crowd, of which the legate was the central figure,
he raised his arm with a gesture of indignation, and protested
vehemently that the assassination of Maximilian's father had been
iniquitously charged upon himself.--"And yet," said he, "upon that one
gratuitous assumption have been built all the other foul suspicions
directed against my person."

"Pardon me, sir," replied the legate, "the evidences were such as
satisfied the emperor and his council; and he showed it by the
vigilance with which he watched over the Prince Maximilian, and the
anxiety with which he kept him from approaching your highness, until
his pretensions could be established by arms. But, if more direct
evidence were wanting, since yesterday we have had it in the dying
confession of the very agent employed to strike the fatal blow. That
man died last night, penitent and contrite, having fully unburdened his
conscience, at Waldenhausen. With evidence so overwhelming, the emperor
exacts no further sacrifice from your highness than that of retirement
from public life, to any one of your own castles in your patrimonial
principality of Oberhornstein.--But, now for a more pleasing duty.
Citizens of Klosterheim, welcome your young Landgrave in the emperor's
name: and to-morrow you shall welcome also your future Landgravine, the
lovely Countess Paulina, cousin to the emperor, my master, and cousin
also to your noble young Landgrave."

"No!" exclaimed the malignant usurper, "her you shall never see alive;
for that, be well assured, I have taken care."

"Vile, unworthy prince!" replied Maximilian, his eyes kindling with
passion, "know that your intentions, so worthy of a fiend, towards that
most innocent of ladies, have been confounded and brought to nothing by
your own gentle daughter, worthy of a far nobler father."

"If you speak of my directions for administering the torture,--a matter
in which I presume that I exercised no unusual privilege amongst German
sovereigns,--you are right. But it was not that of which I spoke."

"Of what else, then?--The Lady Paulina has escaped."

"True, to Falkenberg. But, doubtless, young Landgrave, you have heard
of such a thing as the intercepting of a fugitive prisoner; in such a
case, you know the punishment which martial law awards. The governor at
Falkenberg had his orders." These last significant words he uttered in
a tone of peculiar meaning. His eye sparkled with bright gleams of
malice and of savage vengeance, rioting in its completion.

"O, heart--heart!" exclaimed Maximilian, "can this be possible?"

The imperial legate and all present crowded around him to suggest such
consolation as they could. Some offered to ride off express to
Falkenberg; some argued that the Lady Paulina had been seen within the
last hour. But the hellish exulter in ruined happiness destroyed that
hope as soon as it dawned.

"Children!" said he, "foolish children! cherish not such chimeras. Me
you have destroyed, Landgrave, and the prospects of my house. Now
perish yourself.--Look there: is that the form of one who lives and
breathes?"

All present turned to the scaffold, in which direction he pointed, and
now first remarked, covered with a black pall, and brought hither
doubtless to aggravate the pangs of death to Maximilian, what seemed
but too certainly a female corpse. The stature, the fine swell of the
bust, the rich outline of the form, all pointed to the same conclusion;
and, in this recumbent attitude, it seemed but too clearly to present
the magnificent proportions of Paulina.

There was a dead silence. Who could endure to break it? Who make the
effort which was forever to fix the fate of Maximilian?

He himself could not. At last the deposed usurper, craving for the
consummation of his vengeance, himself strode forward; with one savage
grasp he tore away the pall, and below it lay the innocent features,
sleeping in her last tranquil slumber, of his own gentle-minded
daughter!

       *       *       *       *       *

No heart was found savage enough to exult; the sorrow even of such a
father was sacred. Death, and through his own orders, had struck the
only being whom he had ever loved; and the petrific mace of the fell
destroyer seemed to have smitten his own heart, and withered its hopes
forever.

Everybody comprehended the mistake in a moment. Paulina had lingered at
Waldenhausen under the protection of an imperial corps, which she had
met in her flight. The tyrant, who had heard of her escape, but
apprehended no necessity for such a step on the part of his daughter,
had issued sudden orders to the officer commanding the military post at
Falkenberg, to seize and shoot the female prisoner escaping from
confinement, without allowing any explanations whatsoever, on her
arrival at Falkenberg. This precaution he had adopted in part to
intercept any denunciation of the emperor's vengeance which Paulina
might address to the officer. As a rude soldier, accustomed to obey the
letter of his orders, this commandant had executed his commission; and
the gentle Adeline, who had naturally hastened to the protection of her
father's chateau, surrendered her breath meekly and with resignation to
what she believed a simple act of military violence; and this she did
before she could know a syllable of her father's guilt or his fall, and
without any the least reason for supposing him connected with the
occasion of her early death.

At this moment Paulina made her appearance unexpectedly, to reassure
the young Landgrave by her presence, and to weep over her young friend,
whom she had lost almost before she had come to know her. The scaffold,
the corpse, and the other images of sorrow, were then withdrawn; seven
thousand imperial troops presented arms to the youthful Landgrave and
the future Landgravine, the brilliant favorites of the emperor; the
immense area of St. Agnes resounded with the congratulations of
Klosterheim; and as the magnificent cortege moved off to the interior
of the _schloss_, the swell of the coronation anthem rising in
peals upon the ear from the choir of St. Agnes, and from the military
bands of the imperial troops, awoke the promise of happier days, and of
more equitable government, to the long-harassed inhabitants of
Klosterheim.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Klosterheimers knew enough already, personally or by questions
easily answered in every quarter, to supply any links which were
wanting in the rapid explanations of the legate. Nevertheless, that
nothing might remain liable to misapprehension or cavil, a short
manifesto was this night circulated by the new government, from which
the following facts are abstracted:

The last rightful Landgrave, whilst yet a young man, had been
assassinated in the forest when hunting. A year or two before this
catastrophe he had contracted what, from the circumstances, was
presumed, at the time, to be a _morganatic_ or left-handed
marriage, with a lady of high birth, nearly connected with the imperial
house. The effect of such a marriage went to incapacitate the children
who might be born under it, male or female, from succeeding. On that
account, as well as because current report had represented her as
childless, the widow lady escaped all attempts from the assassin.
Meantime this lady, who was no other than Sister Madeline, had been
thus indebted for her safety to two rumors, which were in fact equally
false. She soon found means of convincing the emperor, who had been the
bosom friend of her princely husband, that her marriage was a perfect
one, and conferred the fullest rights of succession upon her infant son
Maximilian, whom at the earliest age, and with the utmost secrecy, she
had committed to the care of his imperial majesty. This powerful
guardian had in every way watched over the interests of the young
prince. But the Thirty Years' War had thrown all Germany into
distractions, which for a time thwarted the emperor, and favored the
views of the usurper. Latterly, also, another question had arisen on
the city and dependences of Klosterheim, as distinct from the
Landgraviate. These, it was now affirmed, were a female appanage, and
could only pass back to the Landgraves of X---- through a marriage with
the female inheretrix. To reconcile all claims, therefore, on finding
this bar in the way, the emperor had resolved to promote a marriage for
Maximilian with Paulina, who stood equally related to the imperial
house and to that of her lover. In this view he had despatched Paulina
to Klosterheim, with proper documents to support the claims of both
parties. Of these documents she had been robbed at Waldenhausen; and
the very letter which was designed to introduce Maximilian as "the
child and sole representative of the late murdered Landgrave," falling
in this surreptitious way into the usurper's hand, had naturally
misdirected his attacks to the person of Paulina.

For the rest, as regarded the mysterious movements of The Masque, these
were easily explained. Fear, and the exaggerations of fear, had done
one half the work to his hands, by preparing people to fall easy dupes
to the plans laid, and by increasing the romantic wonders of his
achievements. Coöperation, also, on the part of the very students and
others, who stood forward as the night-watch for detecting him, had
served The Masque no less powerfully. The appearances of deadly
struggles had been arranged artificially to countenance the plot and to
aid the terror. Finally, the secret passages which communicated between
the forest and the chapel of St. Agnes (passages of which many were
actually applied to that very use in the Thirty Years' War) had been
unreservedly placed at their disposal by the lady abbess, an early
friend of the unhappy Landgravine, who sympathized deeply with that
lady's unmerited sufferings.

One other explanation followed, communicated in a letter from
Maximilian to the legate; this related to the murder of the old
seneschal,--a matter in which the young prince took some blame to
himself, as having unintentionally drawn upon that excellent servant
his unhappy fate. "The seneschal," said the writer, "was the faithful
friend of my family, and knew the whole course of its misfortunes. He
continued his abode at the _schloss_, to serve my interest; and in
some measure I may fear that I drew upon him his fate. Traversing late
one evening a suite of rooms, which his assistance and my own
mysterious disguise laid open to my passage at all hours, I came
suddenly upon the prince's retirement. He pursued me, but with
hesitation. Some check I gave to his motions by halting before a
portrait of my unhappy father, and emphatically pointing his attention
to it. Conscience, I well knew, would supply a commentary to my act. I
produced the impression which I had anticipated, but not so strongly as
to stop his pursuit. My course necessarily drew him into the
seneschal's room. The old man was sleeping; and this accident threw
into the prince's hands a paper, which, I have reason to think, shed
some considerable light upon my own pretensions, and, in fact, first
made my enemy acquainted with my existence and my claims. Meantime, the
seneschal had secured the prince's vengeance upon himself. He was now
known as a faithful agent in my service. That fact signed his death-
warrant. There is a window in a gallery which commands the interior of
the seneschal's room. On the evening of the last _fęte_,
waiting there for an opportunity of speaking securely with this
faithful servant, I heard a deep groan, and then another, and another;
I raised myself, and, with an ejaculation of horror, looked down upon
the murderer, then surveying his victim with hellish triumph. My loud
exclamation drew the murderer's eye upwards: under the pangs of an
agitated conscience, I have reason to think that he took me for my
unhappy father, who perished at my age, and is said to have resembled
me closely. Who that murderer was, I need not say more directly. He
fled with the terror of one who flies from an apparition. Taking a
lesson from this incident, on that same night, by the very same sudden
revelation of what passed, no doubt, for my father's countenance, aided
by my mysterious character, and the proof I had announced to him
immediately before my acquaintance with the secret of the seneschal's
murder, in this and no other way it was that I produced that powerful
impression upon the prince which terminated the festivities of that
evening, and which all Klosterheim witnessed. If not, it is for the
prince to explain in what other way I did or could affect him so
powerfully."

This explanation of the else unaccountable horror manifested by the ex-
Landgrave on the sudden exposure of The Masque's features, received a
remarkable confirmation from the confession of the miserable assassin
at Waldenhausen. This man's illness had been first brought on by the
sudden shock of a situation pretty nearly the same, acting on a
conscience more disturbed, and a more superstitious mind. In the very
act of attempting to assassinate or rob Maximilian, he had been
suddenly dragged by that prince into a dazzling light; and this
settling full upon features which too vividly recalled to the
murderer's recollection the last unhappy Landgrave, at the very same
period of blooming manhood, and in his own favorite hunting palace, not
far from which the murder had been perpetrated, naturally enough had
for a time unsettled the guilty man's understanding, and, terminating
in a nervous fever, had at length produced his penitential death.

A death, happily of the same character, soon overtook the deposed
Landgrave. He was laid by the side of his daughter, whose memory, as
much even as his own penitence, availed to gather round his final
resting-place the forgiving thoughts even of those who had suffered
most from his crimes. Klosterheim in the next age flourished greatly,
being one of those cities which benefited by the peace of Westphalia.
Many changes took place in consequence, greatly affecting the
architectural character of the town and its picturesque antiquities;
but, amidst all revolutions of this nature, the secret passages still
survive, and to this day are shown occasionally to strangers of rank
and consideration, by which, more than by any other of the advantages
at his disposal, The Masque of Klosterheim was enabled to replace
himself in his patrimonial rights, and at the same time to liberate
from a growing oppression his own compatriots and subjects.

The most ancient story in the Pagan records, older by two generations than the
story of Troy, is that of dipus and his mysterious fate, which wrapt
in ruin both himself and all his kindred. No story whatever continued
so long to impress the Greek sensibilities with religious awe, or was
felt by the great tragic poets to be so supremely fitted for scenical
representation. In one of its stages, this story is clothed with the
majesty of darkness; in another stage, it is radiant with burning
lights of female love, the most faithful and heroic, offering a
beautiful relief to the preternatural malice dividing the two sons of
dipus. This malice was so intense, that when the corpses of both
brothers were burned together on the same funeral pyre (as by one
tradition they were), the flames from each parted asunder, and refused
to mingle. This female love was so intense, that it survived the death
of its object, cared not for human praise or blame, and laughed at the
grave which waited in the rear for itself, yawning visibly for
immediate retribution. There are four separate movements through which
this impassioned tale devolves; all are of commanding interest; and all
wear a character of portentous solemnity, which fits them for
harmonizing with the dusky shadows of that deep antiquity into which
they ascend.

One only feature there is in the story, and this belongs to its second
stage (which is also its sublimest stage), where a pure taste is likely
to pause, and to revolt as from something not perfectly reconciled with
the general depth of the coloring. This lies in the Sphinx's riddle,
which, as hitherto explained, seems to us deplorably below the grandeur
of the occasion. Three thousand years, at the least, have passed away
since that riddle was propounded; and it seems odd enough that the
proper solution should not present itself till November of 1849. That
is true; it seems odd, but still it is possible, that we, in _anno
domini_ 1849, may see further through a mile-stone than dipus, the
king, in the year B. c. twelve or thirteen hundred. The long interval
between the enigma and its answer may remind the reader of an old story
in Joe Miller, where a traveller, apparently an inquisitive person, in
passing-through a toll-bar, said to the keeper, "How do you like your
eggs dressed?" Without waiting for the answer, he rode off; but twenty-
five years later, riding through the same bar, kept by the same man,
the traveller looked steadfastly at him, and received the monosyllabic
answer, "_Poached_." A long parenthesis is twenty-five years; and
we, gazing back over a far wider gulf of time, shall endeavor to look
hard at the Sphinx, and to convince that mysterious young lady,--if our
voice can reach her,--that she was too easily satisfied with the answer
given; that the true answer is yet to come; and that, in fact, dipus
shouted before he was out of the wood.

But, first of all, let us rehearse the circumstances of this old
Grecian story. For in a popular journal it is always a duty to assume
that perhaps three readers out of four may have had no opportunity, by
the course of their education, for making themselves acquainted with
classical legends. And in this present case, besides the
indispensableness of the story to the proper comprehension of our own
improved answer to the Sphinx, the story has a separate and independent
value of its own; for it illustrates a profound but obscure idea of
Pagan ages, which is connected with the elementary glimpses of man into
the abysses of his higher relations, and lurks mysteriously amongst
what Milton so finely calls "the dark foundations" of our human nature.
This notion it is hard to express in modern phrase, for we have no idea
exactly corresponding to it; but in Latin it was called _piacularity_.
The reader must understand upon our authority, _nostro periculo_, and
in defiance of all the false translations spread through books, that
the ancients (meaning the Greeks and Romans before the time of
Christianity) had no idea, not by the faintest vestige, of what in the
scriptural system is called _sin_. The Latin word _peccatum_, the Greek
word _amartia_, are translated continually by the word _sin_; but
neither one word nor the other has any such meaning in writers
belonging to the pure classical period. When baptized into new meaning
by the adoption of Christianity, these words, in common with many
others, transmigrated into new and philosophic functions. But
originally they tended towards no such acceptations, nor _could_ have
done so; seeing that the ancients had no avenue opened to them through
which the profound idea of _sin_ would have been even dimly
intelligible. Plato, four hundred years before Christ, or Cicero, more
than three hundred years later, was fully equal to the idea of _guilt_
through all its gamut; but no more equal to the idea of _sin_, than a
sagacious hound to the idea of gravitation, or of central forces. It is
the tremendous postulate upon which this idea reposes that constitutes
the initial moment of that revelation which is common to Judaism and to
Christianity. We have no intention of wandering into any discussion
upon this question. It will suffice for the service of the occasion if
we say that guilt, in all its modifications, implies only a defect or a
wound in the individual. Sin, on the other hand, the most mysterious,
and the most sorrowful of all ideas, implies a taint not in the
individual but in the race--_that_ is the distinction; or a taint
in the individual, not through any local disease of his own, but
through a scrofula equally diffused through the infinite family of man.
We are not speaking controversially, either as teachers of theology or
of philosophy; and we are careless of the particular construction by
which the reader interprets to himself this profound idea. What we
affirm is, that this idea was utterly and exquisitely inappreciable by
Pagan Greece and Rome; that various translations from Pindar.


These preliminary confessions, or introductory narrative of the youthful
adventures which laid the foundation of the writer's habit of
opium-eating in after-life, it has been judged proper to premise, for
three several reasons:

1.  As forestalling that question, and giving it a satisfactory answer,
which else would painfully obtrude itself in the course of the Opium
Confessions--"How came any reasonable being to subject himself to such a
yoke of misery; voluntarily to incur a captivity so servile, and
knowingly to fetter himself with such a sevenfold chain?"--a question
which, if not somewhere plausibly resolved, could hardly fail, by the
indignation which it would be apt to raise as against an act of wanton
folly, to interfere with that degree of sympathy which is necessary in
any case to an author's purposes.

2.  As furnishing a key to some parts of that tremendous scenery which
afterwards peopled the dreams of the Opium-eater.

3.  As creating some previous interest of a personal sort in the
confessing subject, apart from the matter of the confessions, which
cannot fail to render the confessions themselves more interesting.  If a
man "whose talk is of oxen" should become an opium-eater, the probability
is that (if he is not too dull to dream at all) he will dream about oxen;
whereas, in the case before him, the reader will find that the
Opium-eater boasteth himself to be a philosopher; and accordingly, that
the phantasmagoria of _his_ dreams (waking or sleeping, day-dreams or
night-dreams) is suitable to one who in that character

   Humani nihil a se alienum putat.

For amongst the conditions which he deems indispensable to the sustaining
of any claim to the title of philosopher is not merely the possession of
a superb intellect in its _analytic_ functions (in which part of the
pretensions, however, England can for some generations show but few
claimants; at least, he is not aware of any known candidate for this
honour who can be styled emphatically _a subtle thinker_, with the
exception of _Samuel Taylor Coleridge_, and in a narrower department of
thought with the recent illustrious exception of _David Ricardo_) but
also on such a constitution of the _moral_ faculties as shall give him an
inner eye and power of intuition for the vision and the mysteries of our
human nature: _that_ constitution of faculties, in short, which (amongst
all the generations of men that from the beginning of time have deployed
into life, as it were, upon this planet) our English poets have possessed
in the highest degree, and Scottish professors in the lowest.

I have often been asked how I first came to be a regular opium-eater, and
have suffered, very unjustly, in the opinion of my acquaintance from
being reputed to have brought upon myself all the sufferings which I
shall have to record, by a long course of indulgence in this practice
purely for the sake of creating an artificial state of pleasurable
excitement.  This, however, is a misrepresentation of my case.  True it
is that for nearly ten years I did occasionally take opium for the sake
of the exquisite pleasure it gave me; but so long as I took it with this
view I was effectually protected from all material bad consequences by
the necessity of interposing long intervals between the several acts of
indulgence, in order to renew the pleasurable sensations.  It was not for
the purpose of creating pleasure, but of mitigating pain in the severest
degree, that I first began to use opium as an article of daily diet.  In
the twenty-eighth year of my age a most painful affection of the stomach,
which I had first experienced about ten years before, attacked me in
great strength.  This affection had originally been caused by extremities
of hunger, suffered in my boyish days.  During the season of hope and
redundant happiness which succeeded (that is, from eighteen to twenty-
four) it had slumbered; for the three following years it had revived at
intervals; and now, under unfavourable circumstances, from depression of
spirits, it attacked me with a violence that yielded to no remedies but
opium.  As the youthful sufferings which first produced this derangement
of the stomach were interesting in themselves, and in the circumstances
that attended them, I shall here briefly retrace them.

My father died when I was about seven years old, and left me to the care
of four guardians.  I was sent to various schools, great and small; and
was very early distinguished for my classical attainments, especially for
my knowledge of Greek.  At thirteen I wrote Greek with ease; and at
fifteen my command of that language was so great that I not only composed
Greek verses in lyric metres, but could converse in Greek fluently and
without embarrassment--an accomplishment which I have not since met with
in any scholar of my times, and which in my case was owing to the
practice of daily reading off the newspapers into the best Greek I could
furnish _extempore_; for the necessity of ransacking my memory and
invention for all sorts and combinations of periphrastic expressions as
equivalents for modern ideas, images, relations of things, &c., gave me a
compass of diction which would never have been called out by a dull
translation of moral essays, &c.  "That boy," said one of my masters,
pointing the attention of a stranger to me, "that boy could harangue an
Athenian mob better than you and I could address an English one."  He who
honoured me with this eulogy was a scholar, "and a ripe and a good one,"
and of all my tutors was the only one whom I loved or reverenced.
Unfortunately for me (and, as I afterwards learned, to this worthy man's
great indignation), I was transferred to the care, first of a blockhead,
who was in a perpetual panic lest I should expose his ignorance; and
finally to that of a respectable scholar at the head of a great school on
an ancient foundation.  This man had been appointed to his situation by
--- College, Oxford, and was a sound, well-built scholar, but (like most
men whom I have known from that college) coarse, clumsy, and inelegant.  A
miserable contrast he presented, in my eyes, to the Etonian brilliancy of
my favourite master; and beside, he could not disguise from my hourly
notice the poverty and meagreness of his understanding.  It is a bad
thing for a boy to be and to know himself far beyond his tutors, whether
in knowledge or in power of mind.  This was the case, so far as regarded
knowledge at least, not with myself only, for the two boys, who jointly
with myself composed the first form, were better Grecians than the head-
master, though not more elegant scholars, nor at all more accustomed to
sacrifice to the Graces.  When I first entered I remember that we read
Sophocles; and it was a constant matter of triumph to us, the learned
triumvirate of the first form, to see our "Archididascalus" (as he loved
to be called) conning our lessons before we went up, and laying a regular
train, with lexicon and grammar, for blowing up and blasting (as it were)
any difficulties he found in the choruses; whilst _we_ never condescended
to open our books until the moment of going up, and were generally
employed in writing epigrams upon his wig or some such important matter.
My two class-fellows were poor, and dependent for their future prospects
at the university on the recommendation of the head-master; but I, who
had a small patrimonial property, the income of which was sufficient to
support me at college, wished to be sent thither immediately.  I made
earnest representations on the subject to my guardians, but all to no
purpose.  One, who was more reasonable and had more knowledge of the
world than the rest, lived at a distance; two of the other three resigned
all their authority into the hands of the fourth; and this fourth, with
whom I had to negotiate, was a worthy man in his way, but haughty,
obstinate, and intolerant of all opposition to his will.  After a certain
number of letters and personal interviews, I found that I had nothing to
hope for, not even a compromise of the matter, from my guardian.
Unconditional submission was what he demanded, and I prepared myself,
therefore, for other measures.  Summer was now coming on with hasty
steps, and my seventeenth birthday was fast approaching, after which day
I had sworn within myself that I would no longer be numbered amongst
schoolboys.  Money being what I chiefly wanted, I wrote to a woman of
high rank, who, though young herself, had known me from a child, and had
latterly treated me with great distinction, requesting that she would
"lend" me five guineas.  For upwards of a week no answer came, and I was
beginning to despond, when at length a servant put into my hands a double
letter with a coronet on the seal.  The letter was kind and obliging.  The
fair writer was on the sea-coast, and in that way the delay had arisen;
she enclosed double of what I had asked, and good-naturedly hinted that
if I should _never_ repay her, it would not absolutely ruin her.  Now,
then, I was prepared for my scheme.  Ten guineas, added to about two
which I had remaining from my pocket-money, seemed to me sufficient for
an indefinite length of time; and at that happy age, if no _definite_
boundary can be assigned to one's power, the spirit of hope and pleasure
makes it virtually infinite.

It is a just remark of Dr. Johnson's (and, what cannot often be said of
his remarks, it is a very feeling one), that we never do anything
consciously for the last time (of things, that is, which we have long
been in the habit of doing) without sadness of heart.  This truth I felt
deeply when I came to leave ---, a place which I did not love, and where
I had not been happy.  On the evening before I left --- for ever, I
grieved when the ancient and lofty schoolroom resounded with the evening
service, performed for the last time in my hearing; and at night, when
the muster-roll of names was called over, and mine (as usual) was called
first, I stepped forward, and passing the head-master, who was standing
by, I bowed to him, and looked earnestly in his face, thinking to myself,
"He is old and infirm, and in this world I shall not see him again."  I
was right; I never _did_ see him again, nor ever shall.  He looked at me
complacently, smiled good-naturedly, returned my salutation (or rather my
valediction), and we parted (though he knew it not) for ever.  I could
not reverence him intellectually, but he had been uniformly kind to me,
and had allowed me many indulgences; and I grieved at the thought of the
mortification I should inflict upon him.

The morning came which was to launch me into the world, and from which my
whole succeeding life has in many important points taken its colouring.  I
lodged in the head-master's house, and had been allowed from my first
entrance the indulgence of a private room, which I used both as a
sleeping-room and as a study.  At half after three I rose, and gazed with
deep emotion at the ancient towers of ---, "drest in earliest light," and
beginning to crimson with the radiant lustre of a cloudless July morning.
I was firm and immovable in my purpose; but yet agitated by anticipation
of uncertain danger and troubles; and if I could have foreseen the
hurricane and perfect hail-storm of affliction which soon fell upon me,
well might I have been agitated.  To this agitation the deep peace of the
morning presented an affecting contrast, and in some degree a medicine.
The silence was more profound than that of midnight; and to me the
silence of a summer morning is more touching than all other silence,
because, the light being broad and strong as that of noonday at other
seasons of the year, it seems to differ from perfect day chiefly because
man is not yet abroad; and thus the peace of nature and of the innocent
creatures of God seems to be secure and deep only so long as the presence
of man and his restless and unquiet spirit are not there to trouble its
sanctity.  I dressed myself, took my hat and gloves, and lingered a
little in the room.  For the last year and a half this room had been my
"pensive citadel": here I had read and studied through all the hours of
night, and though true it was that for the latter part of this time I,
who was framed for love and gentle affections, had lost my gaiety and
happiness during the strife and fever of contention with my guardian,
yet, on the other hand, as a boy so passionately fond of books, and
dedicated to intellectual pursuits, I could not fail to have enjoyed many
happy hours in the midst of general dejection.  I wept as I looked round
on the chair, hearth, writing-table, and other familiar objects, knowing
too certainly that I looked upon them for the last time.  Whilst I write
this it is eighteen years ago, and yet at this moment I see distinctly,
as if it were yesterday, the lineaments and expression of the object on
which I fixed my parting gaze.  It was a picture of the lovely ---, which
hung over the mantelpiece, the eyes and mouth of which were so beautiful,
and the whole countenance so radiant with benignity and divine
tranquillity, that I had a thousand times laid down my pen or my book to
gather consolation from it, as a devotee from his patron saint.  Whilst I
was yet gazing upon it the deep tones of --- clock proclaimed that it was
four o'clock.  I went up to the picture, kissed it, and then gently
walked out and closed the door for ever!

So blended and intertwisted in this life are occasions of laughter and of
tears, that I cannot yet recall without smiling an incident which
occurred at that time, and which had nearly put a stop to the immediate
execution of my plan.  I had a trunk of immense weight, for, besides my
clothes, it contained nearly all my library.  The difficulty was to get
this removed to a carrier's: my room was at an aerial elevation in the
house, and (what was worse) the staircase which communicated with this
angle of the building was accessible only by a gallery, which passed the
head-master's chamber door.  I was a favourite with all the servants, and
knowing that any of them would screen me and act confidentially, I
communicated my embarrassment to a groom of the head-master's.  The groom
swore he would do anything I wished, and when the time arrived went
upstairs to bring the trunk down.  This I feared was beyond the strength
of any one man; however, the groom was a man

   Of Atlantean shoulders, fit to bear
   The weight of mightiest monarchies;

and had a back as spacious as Salisbury Plain.  Accordingly he persisted
in bringing down the trunk alone, whilst I stood waiting at the foot of
the last flight in anxiety for the event.  For some time I heard him
descending with slow and firm steps; but unfortunately, from his
trepidation, as he drew near the dangerous quarter, within a few steps of
the gallery, his foot slipped, and the mighty burden falling from his
shoulders, gained such increase of impetus at each step of the descent,
that on reaching the bottom it trundled, or rather leaped, right across,
with the noise of twenty devils, against the very bedroom door of the
Archididascalus.  My first thought was that all was lost, and that my
only chance for executing a retreat was to sacrifice my baggage.  However,
on reflection I determined to abide the issue.  The groom was in the
utmost alarm, both on his own account and on mine, but, in spite of this,
so irresistibly had the sense of the ludicrous in this unhappy
_contretemps_ taken possession of his fancy, that he sang out a long,
loud, and canorous peal of laughter, that might have wakened the Seven
Sleepers.  At the sound of this resonant merriment, within the very ears
of insulted authority, I could not myself forbear joining in it; subdued
to this, not so much by the unhappy _etourderie_ of the trunk, as by the
effect it had upon the groom.  We both expected, as a matter of course,
that Dr. --- would sally, out of his room, for in general, if but a mouse
stirred, he sprang out like a mastiff from his kennel.  Strange to say,
however, on this occasion, when the noise of laughter had ceased, no
sound, or rustling even, was to be heard in the bedroom.  Dr. --- had a
painful complaint, which, sometimes keeping him awake, made his sleep
perhaps, when it did come, the deeper.  Gathering courage from the
silence, the groom hoisted his burden again, and accomplished the
remainder of his descent without accident.  I waited until I saw the
trunk placed on a wheelbarrow and on its road to the carrier's; then,
"with Providence my guide," I set off on foot, carrying a small parcel
with some articles of dress under my arm; a favourite English poet in one
pocket, and a small 12mo volume, containing about nine plays of
Euripides, in the other.

It had been my intention originally to proceed to Westmoreland, both from
the love I bore to that country and on other personal accounts.  Accident,
however, gave a different direction to my wanderings, and I bent my steps
towards North Wales.

After wandering about for some time in Denbighshire, Merionethshire, and
Carnarvonshire, I took lodgings in a small neat house in B---.  Here I
might have stayed with great comfort for many weeks, for provisions were
cheap at B---, from the scarcity of other markets for the surplus produce
of a wide agricultural district.  An accident, however, in which perhaps
no offence was designed, drove me out to wander again.  I know not
whether my reader may have remarked, but I have often remarked, that the
proudest class of people in England (or at any rate the class whose pride
is most apparent) are the families of bishops.  Noblemen and their
children carry about with them, in their very titles, a sufficient
notification of their rank.  Nay, their very names (and this applies also
to the children of many untitled houses) are often, to the English ear,
adequate exponents of high birth or descent.  Sackville, Manners,
Fitzroy, Paulet, Cavendish, and scores of others, tell their own tale.
Such persons, therefore, find everywhere a due sense of their claims
already established, except among those who are ignorant of the world by
virtue of their own obscurity: "Not to know _them_, argues one's self
unknown."  Their manners take a suitable tone and colouring, and for once
they find it necessary to impress a sense of their consequence upon
others, they meet with a thousand occasions for moderating and tempering
this sense by acts of courteous condescension.  With the families of
bishops it is otherwise: with them, it is all uphill work to make known
their pretensions; for the proportion of the episcopal bench taken from
noble families is not at any time very large, and the succession to these
dignities is so rapid that the public ear seldom has time to become
familiar with them, unless where they are connected with some literary
reputation.  Hence it is that the children of bishops carry about with
them an austere and repulsive air, indicative of claims not generally
acknowledged, a sort of _noli me tangere_ manner, nervously apprehensive
of too familiar approach, and shrinking with the sensitiveness of a gouty
man from all contact with the [Greek text].  Doubtless, a powerful
understanding, or unusual goodness of nature, will preserve a man from
such weakness, but in general the truth of my representation will be
acknowledged; pride, if not of deeper root in such families, appears at
least more upon the surface of their manners.  This spirit of manners
naturally communicates itself to their domestics and other dependants.
Now, my landlady had been a lady's maid or a nurse in the family of the
Bishop of ---, and had but lately married away and "settled" (as such
people express it) for life.  In a little town like B---, merely to have
lived in the bishop's family conferred some distinction; and my good
landlady had rather more than her share of the pride I have noticed on
that score.  What "my lord" said and what "my lord" did, how useful he
was in Parliament and how indispensable at Oxford, formed the daily
burden of her talk.  All this I bore very well, for I was too
good-natured to laugh in anybody's face, and I could make an ample
allowance for the garrulity of an old servant.  Of necessity, however, I
must have appeared in her eyes very inadequately impressed with the
bishop's importance, and, perhaps to punish me for my indifference, or
possibly by accident, she one day repeated to me a conversation in which
I was indirectly a party concerned.  She had been to the palace to pay
her respects to the family, and, dinner being over, was summoned into the
dining-room.  In giving an account of her household economy she happened
to mention that she had let her apartments.  Thereupon the good bishop
(it seemed) had taken occasion to caution her as to her selection of
inmates, "for," said he, "you must recollect, Betty, that this place is
in the high road to the Head; so that multitudes of Irish swindlers
running away from their debts into England, and of English swindlers
running away from their debts to the Isle of Man, are likely to take this
place in their route."  This advice certainly was not without reasonable
grounds, but rather fitted to be stored up for Mrs. Betty's private
meditations than specially reported to me.  What followed, however, was
somewhat worse.  "Oh, my lord," answered my landlady (according to her
own representation of the matter), "I really don't think this young
gentleman is a swindler, because ---"  "You don't _think_ me a swindler?"
said I, interrupting her, in a tumult of indignation: "for the future I
shall spare you the trouble of thinking about it."  And without delay I
prepared for my departure.  Some concessions the good woman seemed
disposed to make; but a harsh and contemptuous expression, which I fear
that I applied to the learned dignitary himself, roused her indignation
in turn, and reconciliation then became impossible.  I was indeed greatly
irritated at the bishop's having suggested any grounds of suspicion,
however remotely, against a person whom he had never seen; and I thought
of letting him know my mind in Greek, which, at the same time that it
would furnish some presumption that I was no swindler, would also (I
hoped) compel the bishop to reply in the same language; in which case I
doubted not to make it appear that if I was not so rich as his lordship,
I was a far better Grecian.  Calmer thoughts, however, drove this boyish
design out of my mind; for I considered that the bishop was in the right
to counsel an old servant; that he could not have designed that his
advice should be reported to me; and that the same coarseness of mind
which had led Mrs. Betty to repeat the advice at all, might have coloured
it in a way more agreeable to her own style of thinking than to the
actual expressions of the worthy bishop.

I left the lodgings the very same hour, and this turned out a very
unfortunate occurrence for me, because, living henceforward at inns, I
was drained of my money very rapidly.  In a fortnight I was reduced to
short allowance; that is, I could allow myself only one meal a day.  From
the keen appetite produced by constant exercise and mountain air, acting
on a youthful stomach, I soon began to suffer greatly on this slender
regimen, for the single meal which I could venture to order was coffee or
tea.  Even this, however, was at length withdrawn; and afterwards, so
long as I remained in Wales, I subsisted either on blackberries, hips,
haws, &c., or on the casual hospitalities which I now and then received
in return for such little services as I had an opportunity of rendering.
Sometimes I wrote letters of business for cottagers who happened to have
relatives in Liverpool or in London; more often I wrote love-letters to
their sweethearts for young women who had lived as servants at Shrewsbury
or other towns on the English border.  On all such occasions I gave great
satisfaction to my humble friends, and was generally treated with
hospitality; and once in particular, near the village of Llan-y-styndw
(or some such name), in a sequestered part of Merionethshire, I was
entertained for upwards of three days by a family of young people with an
affectionate and fraternal kindness that left an impression upon my heart
not yet impaired.  The family consisted at that time of four sisters and
three brothers, all grown up, and all remarkable for elegance and
delicacy of manners.  So much beauty, and so much native good breeding
and refinement, I do not remember to have seen before or since in any
cottage, except once or twice in Westmoreland and Devonshire.  They spoke
English, an accomplishment not often met with in so many members of one
family, especially in villages remote from the high road.  Here I wrote,
on my first introduction, a letter about prize-money, for one of the
brothers, who had served on board an English man-of-war; and, more
privately, two love-letters for two of the sisters.  They were both
interesting-looking girls, and one of uncommon loveliness.  In the midst
of their confusion and blushes, whilst dictating, or rather giving me
general instructions, it did not require any great penetration to
discover that what they wished was that their letters should be as kind
as was consistent with proper maidenly pride.  I contrived so to temper
my expressions as to reconcile the gratification of both feelings; and
they were as much pleased with the way in which I had expressed their
thoughts as (in their simplicity) they were astonished at my having so
readily discovered them.  The reception one meets with from the women of
a family generally determines the tenor of one's whole entertainment.  In
this case I had discharged my confidential duties as secretary so much to
the general satisfaction, perhaps also amusing them with my conversation,
that I was pressed to stay with a cordiality which I had little
inclination to resist.  I slept with the brothers, the only unoccupied
bed standing in the apartment of the young women; but in all other points
they treated me with a respect not usually paid to purses as light as
mine--as if my scholarship were sufficient evidence that I was of "gentle
blood."  Thus I lived with them for three days and great part of a
fourth; and, from the undiminished kindness which they continued to show
me, I believe I might have stayed with them up to this time, if their
power had corresponded with their wishes.  On the last morning, however,
I perceived upon their countenances, as they sate at breakfast, the
expression of some unpleasant communication which was at hand; and soon
after, one of the brothers explained to me that their parents had gone,
the day before my arrival, to an annual meeting of Methodists, held at
Carnarvon, and were that day expected to return; "and if they should not
be so civil as they ought to be," he begged, on the part of all the young
people, that I would not take it amiss.  The parents returned with
churlish faces, and "_Dym Sassenach_" in answer to all my
addresses.  I saw how matters stood; and so, taking an affectionate leave
of my kind and interesting young hosts, I went my way; for, though they
spoke warmly to their parents in my behalf, and often excused the manner
of the old people by saying it was "only their way," yet I easily
understood that my talent for writing love-letters would do as little to
recommend me with two grave sexagenarian Welsh Methodists as my Greek
sapphics or alcaics; and what had been hospitality when offered to me
with the gracious courtesy of my young friends, would become charity when
connected with the harsh demeanour of these old people.  Certainly, Mr.
Shelley is right in his notions about old age: unless powerfully
counteracted by all sorts of opposite agencies, it is a miserable
corrupter and blighter to the genial charities of the human heart.

Soon after this I contrived, by means which I must omit for want of room,
to transfer myself to London.  And now began the latter and fiercer stage
of my long sufferings; without using a disproportionate expression I
might say, of my agony.  For I now suffered, for upwards of sixteen
weeks, the physical anguish of hunger in.  I various degrees of
intensity, but as bitter perhaps as ever any human being can have
suffered who has survived it would not needlessly harass my reader's
feelings by a detail of all that I endured; for extremities such as
these, under any circumstances of heaviest misconduct or guilt, cannot be
contemplated, even in description, without a rueful pity that is painful
to the natural goodness of the human heart.  Let it suffice, at least on
this occasion, to say that a few fragments of bread from the breakfast-
table of one individual (who supposed me to be ill, but did not know of
my being in utter want), and these at uncertain intervals, constituted my
whole support.  During the former part of my sufferings (that is,
generally in Wales, and always for the first two months in London) I was
houseless, and very seldom slept under a roof.   To this constant
exposure to the open air I ascribe it mainly that I did not sink under my
torments.  Latterly, however, when colder and more inclement weather came
on, and when, from the length of my sufferings, I had begun to sink into
a more languishing condition, it was no doubt fortunate for me that the
same person to whose breakfast-table I had access, allowed me to sleep in
a large unoccupied house of which he was tenant.  Unoccupied I call it,
for there was no household or establishment in it; nor any furniture,
indeed, except a table and a few chairs.  But I found, on taking
possession of my new quarters, that the house already contained one
single inmate, a poor friendless child, apparently ten years old; but she
seemed hunger-bitten, and sufferings of that sort often make children
look older than they are.  From this forlorn child I learned that she had
slept and lived there alone for some time before I came; and great joy
the poor creature expressed when she found that I was in future to be her
companion through the hours of darkness.  The house was large, and, from
the want of furniture, the noise of the rats made a prodigious echoing on
the spacious staircase and hall; and amidst the real fleshly ills of cold
and, I fear, hunger, the forsaken child had found leisure to suffer still
more (it appeared) from the self-created one of ghosts.  I promised her
protection against all ghosts whatsoever, but alas! I could offer her no
other assistance.  We lay upon the floor, with a bundle of cursed law
papers for a pillow, but with no other covering than a sort of large
horseman's cloak; afterwards, however, we discovered in a garret an old
sofa-cover, a small piece of rug, and some fragments of other articles,
which added a little to our warmth.  The poor child crept close to me for
warmth, and for security against her ghostly enemies.  When I was not
more than usually ill I took her into my arms, so that in general she was
tolerably warm, and often slept when I could not, for during the last two
months of my sufferings I slept much in daytime, and was apt to fall into
transient dosings at all hours.  But my sleep distressed me more than my
watching, for beside the tumultuousness of my dreams (which were only not
so awful as those which I shall have to describe hereafter as produced by
opium), my sleep was never more than what is called _dog-sleep_; so that
I could hear myself moaning, and was often, as it seemed to me, awakened
suddenly by my own voice; and about this time a hideous sensation began
to haunt me as soon as I fell into a slumber, which has since returned
upon me at different periods of my life--viz., a sort of twitching (I
know not where, but apparently about the region of the stomach) which
compelled me violently to throw out my feet for the sake of relieving it.
This sensation coming on as soon as I began to sleep, and the effort to
relieve it constantly awaking me, at length I slept only from exhaustion;
and from increasing weakness (as I said before) I was constantly falling
asleep and constantly awaking.  Meantime, the master of the house
sometimes came in upon us suddenly, and very early; sometimes not till
ten o'clock, sometimes not at all.  He was in constant fear of bailiffs.
Improving on the plan of Cromwell, every night he slept in a different
quarter of London; and I observed that he never failed to examine through
a private window the appearance of those who knocked at the door before
he would allow it to be opened.  He breaksfasted alone; indeed, his tea
equipage would hardly have admitted of his hazarding an invitation to a
second person, any more than the quantity of esculent _materiel_, which
for the most part was little more than a roll or a few biscuits which he
had bought on his road from the place where he had slept.  Or, if he
_had_ asked a party--as I once learnedly and facetiously observed to
him--the several members of it must have _stood_ in the relation to each
other (not _sate_ in any relation whatever) of succession, as the
metaphysicians have it, and not of a coexistence; in the relation of the
parts of time, and not of the parts of space.  During his breakfast I
generally contrived a reason for lounging in, and, with an air of as much
indifference as I could assume, took up such fragments as he had left;
sometimes, indeed, there were none at all.  In doing this I committed no
robbery except upon the man himself, who was thus obliged (I believe) now
and then to send out at noon for an extra biscuit; for as to the poor
child, _she_ was never admitted into his study (if I may give that name
to his chief depository of parchments, law writings, &c.); that room was
to her the Bluebeard room of the house, being regularly locked on his
departure to dinner, about six o'clock, which usually was his final
departure for the night.  Whether this child were an illegitimate
daughter of Mr. ---, or only a servant, I could not ascertain; she did
not herself know; but certainly she was treated altogether as a menial
servant.  No sooner did Mr. --- make his appearance than she went below
stairs, brushed his shoes, coat, &c.; and, except when she was summoned
to run an errand, she never emerged from the dismal Tartarus of the
kitchen, &c., to the upper air until my welcome knock at night called up
her little trembling footsteps to the front door.  Of her life during the
daytime, however, I knew little but what I gathered from her own account
at night, for as soon as the hours of business commenced I saw that my
absence would be acceptable, and in general, therefore, I went off and
sate in the parks or elsewhere until nightfall.

But who and what, meantime, was the master of the house himself?  Reader,
he was one of those anomalous practitioners in lower departments of the
law who--what shall I say?--who on prudential reasons, or from necessity,
deny themselves all indulgence in the luxury of too delicate a
conscience, (a periphrasis which might be abridged considerably, but
_that_ I leave to the reader's taste): in many walks of life a conscience
is a more expensive encumbrance than a wife or a carriage; and just as
people talk of "laying down" their carriages, so I suppose my friend Mr.
--- had "laid down" his conscience for a time, meaning, doubtless, to
resume it as soon as he could afford it.  The inner economy of such a
man's daily life would present a most strange picture, if I could allow
myself to amuse the reader at his expense.  Even with my limited
opportunities for observing what went on, I saw many scenes of London
intrigues and complex chicanery, "cycle and epicycle, orb in orb," at
which I sometimes smile to this day, and at which I smiled then, in spite
of my misery.  My situation, however, at that time gave me little
experience in my own person of any qualities in Mr. ---'s character but
such as did him honour; and of his whole strange composition I must
forget everything but that towards me he was obliging, and to the extent
of his power, generous.

That power was not, indeed, very extensive; however, in common with the
rats, I sate rent free; and as Dr. Johnson has recorded that he never but
once in his life had as much wall-fruit as he could eat, so let me be
grateful that on that single occasion I had as large a choice of
apartments in a London mansion as I could possibly desire.  Except the
Bluebeard room, which the poor child believed to be haunted, all others,
from the attics to the cellars, were at our service; "the world was all
before us," and we pitched our tent for the night in any spot we chose.
This house I have already described as a large one; it stands in a
conspicuous situation and in a well-known part of London.  Many of my
readers will have passed it, I doubt not, within a few hours of reading
this.  For myself, I never fail to visit it when business draws me to
London; about ten o'clock this very night, August 15, 1821--being my
birthday--I turned aside from my evening walk down Oxford Street,
purposely to take a glance at it; it is now occupied by a respectable
family, and by the lights in the front drawing-room I observed a domestic
party assembled, perhaps at tea, and apparently cheerful and gay.
Marvellous contrast, in my eyes, to the darkness, cold, silence, and
desolation of that same house eighteen years ago, when its nightly
occupants were one famishing scholar and a neglected child.  Her, by-the-
bye, in after-years I vainly endeavoured to trace.  Apart from her
situation, she was not what would be called an interesting child; she was
neither pretty, nor quick in understanding, nor remarkably pleasing in
manners.  But, thank God! even in those years I needed not the
embellishments of novel accessories to conciliate my affections: plain
human nature, in its humblest and most homely apparel, was enough for me,
and I loved the child because she was my partner in wretchedness.  If she
is now living she is probably a mother, with children of her own; but, as
I have said, I could never trace her.

This I regret; but another person there was at that time whom I have
since sought to trace with far deeper earnestness, and with far deeper
sorrow at my failure.  This person was a young woman, and one of that
unhappy class who subsist upon the wages of prostitution.  I feel no
shame, nor have any reason to feel it, in avowing that I was then on
familiar and friendly terms with many women in that unfortunate
condition.  The reader needs neither smile at this avowal nor frown; for,
not to remind my classical readers of the old Latin proverb, "_Sine
cerere_," &c., it may well be supposed that in the existing state of my
purse my connection with such women could not have been an impure one.
But the truth is, that at no time of my life have I been a person to hold
myself polluted by the touch or approach of any creature that wore a
human shape; on the contrary, from my very earliest youth it has been my
pride to converse familiarly, _more Socratio_, with all human beings,
man, woman, and child, that chance might fling in my way; a practice
which is friendly to the knowledge of human nature, to good feelings, and
to that frankness of address which becomes a man who would be thought a
philosopher.  For a philosopher should not see with the eyes of the poor
limitary creature calling himself a man of the world, and filled with
narrow and self-regarding prejudices of birth and education, but should
look upon himself as a catholic creature, and as standing in equal
relation to high and low, to educated and uneducated, to the guilty and
the innocent.  Being myself at that time of necessity a peripatetic, or a
walker of the streets, I naturally fell in more frequently with those
female peripatetics who are technically called street-walkers.  Many of
these women had occasionally taken my part against watchmen who wished to
drive me off the steps of houses where I was sitting.  But one amongst
them, the one on whose account I have at all introduced this subject--yet
no! let me not class the, oh! noble-minded Ann--with that order of women.
Let me find, if it be possible, some gentler name to designate the
condition of her to whose bounty and compassion, ministering to my
necessities when all the world had forsaken me, I owe it that I am at
this time alive.  For many weeks I had walked at nights with this poor
friendless girl up and down Oxford Street, or had rested with her on
steps and under the shelter of porticoes.  She could not be so old as
myself; she told me, indeed, that she had not completed her sixteenth
year.  By such questions as my interest about her prompted I had
gradually drawn forth her simple history.  Hers was a case of ordinary
occurrence (as I have since had reason to think), and one in which, if
London beneficence had better adapted its arrangements to meet it, the
power of the law might oftener be interposed to protect and to avenge.
But the stream of London charity flows in a channel which, though deep
and mighty, is yet noiseless and underground; not obvious or readily
accessible to poor houseless wanderers; and it cannot be denied that the
outside air and framework of London society is harsh, cruel, and
repulsive.  In any case, however, I saw that part of her injuries might
easily have been redressed, and I urged her often and earnestly to lay
her complaint before a magistrate.  Friendless as she was, I assured her
that she would meet with immediate attention, and that English justice,
which was no respecter of persons, would speedily and amply avenge her on
the brutal ruffian who had plundered her little property.  She promised
me often that she would, but she delayed taking the steps I pointed out
from time to time, for she was timid and dejected to a degree which
showed how deeply sorrow had taken hold of her young heart; and perhaps
she thought justly that the most upright judge and the most righteous
tribunals could do nothing to repair her heaviest wrongs.  Something,
however, would perhaps have been done, for it had been settled between us
at length, but unhappily on the very last time but one that I was ever to
see her, that in a day or two we should go together before a magistrate,
and that I should speak on her behalf.  This little service it was
destined, however, that I should never realise.  Meantime, that which she
rendered to me, and which was greater than I could ever have repaid her,
was this:--One night, when we were pacing slowly along Oxford Street, and
after a day when I had felt more than usually ill and faint, I requested
her to turn off with me into Soho Square.  Thither we went, and we sat
down on the steps of a house, which to this hour I never pass without a
pang of grief and an inner act of homage to the spirit of that unhappy
girl, in memory of the noble action which she there performed.  Suddenly,
as we sate, I grew much worse.  I had been leaning my head against her
bosom, and all at once I sank from her arms and fell backwards on the
steps.  From the sensations I then had, I felt an inner conviction of the
liveliest kind, that without some powerful and reviving stimulus I should
either have died on the spot, or should at least have sunk to a point of
exhaustion from which all reascent under my friendless circumstances
would soon have become hopeless.  Then it was, at this crisis of my fate,
that my poor orphan companion, who had herself met with little but
injuries in this world, stretched out a saving hand to me.  Uttering a
cry of terror, but without a moment's delay, she ran off into Oxford
Street, and in less time than could be imagined returned to me with a
glass of port wine and spices, that acted upon my empty stomach, which at
that time would have rejected all solid food, with an instantaneous power
of restoration; and for this glass the generous girl without a murmur
paid out of her humble purse at a time--be it remembered!--when she had
scarcely wherewithal to purchase the bare necessaries of life, and when
she could have no reason to expect that I should ever be able to
reimburse her.

Oh, youthful benefactress! how often in succeeding years, standing in
solitary places, and thinking of thee with grief of heart and perfect
love--how often have I wished that, as in ancient times, the curse of a
father was believed to have a supernatural power, and to pursue its
object with a fatal necessity of self-fulfilment; even so the benediction
of a heart oppressed with gratitude might have a like prerogative, might
have power given to it from above to chase, to haunt, to waylay, to
overtake, to pursue thee into the central darkness of a London brothel,
or (if it were possible) into the darkness of the grave, there to awaken
thee with an authentic message of peace and forgiveness, and of final
reconciliation!

I do not often weep: for not only do my thoughts on subjects connected
with the chief interests of man daily, nay hourly, descend a thousand
fathoms "too deep for tears;" not only does the sternness of my habits of
thought present an antagonism to the feelings which prompt tears--wanting
of necessity to those who, being protected usually by their levity from
any tendency to meditative sorrow, would by that same levity be made
incapable of resisting it on any casual access of such feelings; but
also, I believe that all minds which have contemplated such objects as
deeply as I have done, must, for their own protection from utter
despondency, have early encouraged and cherished some tranquillising
belief as to the future balances and the hieroglyphic meanings of human
sufferings.  On these accounts I am cheerful to this hour, and, as I have
said, I do not often weep.  Yet some feelings, though not deeper or more
passionate, are more tender than others; and often, when I walk at this
time in Oxford Street by dreamy lamplight, and hear those airs played on
a barrel-organ which years ago solaced me and my dear companion (as I
must always call her), I shed tears, and muse with myself at the
mysterious dispensation which so suddenly and so critically separated us
for ever.  How it happened the reader will understand from what remains
of this introductory narration.

Soon after the period of the last incident I have recorded I met in
Albemarle Street a gentleman of his late Majesty's household.  This
gentleman had received hospitalities on different occasions from my
family, and he challenged me upon the strength of my family likeness.  I
did not attempt any disguise; I answered his questions ingenuously, and,
on his pledging his word of honour that he would not betray me to my
guardians, I gave him an address to my friend the attorney's.  The next
day I received from him a 10 pound bank-note.  The letter enclosing it
was delivered with other letters of business to the attorney, but though
his look and manner informed me that he suspected its contents, he gave
it up to me honourably and without demur.

This present, from the particular service to which it was applied, leads
me naturally to speak of the purpose which had allured me up to London,
and which I had been (to use a forensic word) soliciting from the first
day of my arrival in London to that of my final departure.

In so mighty a world as London it will surprise my readers that I should
not have found some means of starving off the last extremities, of
penury; and it will strike them that two resources at least must have
been open to me--viz., either to seek assistance from the friends of my
family, or to turn my youthful talents and attainments into some channel
of pecuniary emolument.  As to the first course, I may observe generally,
that what I dreaded beyond all other evils was the chance of being
reclaimed by my guardians; not doubting that whatever power the law gave
them would have been enforced against me to the utmost--that is, to the
extremity of forcibly restoring me to the school which I had quitted, a
restoration which, as it would in my eyes have been a dishonour, even if
submitted to voluntarily, could not fail, when extorted from me in
contempt and defiance of my own wishes and efforts, to have been a
humiliation worse to me than death, and which would indeed have
terminated in death.  I was therefore shy enough of applying for
assistance even in those quarters where I was sure of receiving it, at
the risk of furnishing my guardians with any clue of recovering me.  But
as to London in particular, though doubtless my father had in his
lifetime had many friends there, yet (as ten years had passed since his
death) I remembered few of them even by name; and never having seen
London before, except once for a few hours, I knew not the address of
even those few.  To this mode of gaining help, therefore, in part the
difficulty, but much more the paramount fear which I have mentioned,
habitually indisposed me.  In regard to the other mode, I now feel half
inclined to join my reader in wondering that I should have overlooked it.
As a corrector of Greek proofs (if in no other way) I might doubtless
have gained enough for my slender wants.  Such an office as this I could
have discharged with an exemplary and punctual accuracy that would soon
have gained me the confidence of my employers.  But it must not be
forgotten that, even for such an office as this, it was necessary that I
should first of all have an introduction to some respectable publisher,
and this I had no means of obtaining.  To say the truth, however, it had
never once occurred to me to think of literary labours as a source of
profit.  No mode sufficiently speedy of obtaining money had ever occurred
to me but that of borrowing it on the strength of my future claims and
expectations.  This mode I sought by every avenue to compass; and amongst
other persons I applied to a Jew named D---

To this Jew, and to other advertising money-lenders (some of whom were, I
believe, also Jews), I had introduced myself with an account of my
expectations; which account, on examining my father's will at Doctors'
Commons, they had ascertained to be correct.  The person there mentioned
as the second son of --- was found to have all the claims (or more than
all) that I had stated; but one question still remained, which the faces
of the Jews pretty significantly suggested--was _I_ that person?  This
doubt had never occurred to me as a possible one; I had rather feared,
whenever my Jewish friends scrutinised me keenly, that I might be too
well known to be that person, and that some scheme might be passing in
their minds for entrapping me and selling me to my guardians.  It was
strange to me to find my own self _materialiter_ considered (so I
expressed it, for I doated on logical accuracy of distinctions), accused,
or at least suspected, of counterfeiting my own self _formaliter_
considered.  However, to satisfy their scruples, I took the only course
in my power.  Whilst I was in Wales I had received various letters from
young friends these I produced, for I carried them constantly in my
pocket, being, indeed, by this time almost the only relics of my personal
encumbrances (excepting the clothes I wore) which I had not in one way or
other disposed of.  Most of these letters were from the Earl of ---, who
was at that time my chief (or rather only) confidential friend.  These
letters were dated from Eton.  I had also some from the Marquis of ---,
his father, who, though absorbed in agricultural pursuits, yet having
been an Etonian himself, and as good a scholar as a nobleman needs to be,
still retained an affection for classical studies and for youthful
scholars.  He had accordingly, from the time that I was fifteen,
corresponded with me; sometimes upon the great improvements which he had
made or was meditating in the counties of M--- and Sl--- since I had been
there, sometimes upon the merits of a Latin poet, and at other times
suggesting subjects to me on which he wished me to write verses.

On reading the letters, one of my Jewish friends agreed to furnish me
with two or three hundred pounds on my personal security, provided I
could persuade the young Earl --- who was, by the way, not older than
myself--to guarantee the payment on our coming of age; the Jew's final
object being, as I now suppose, not the trifling profit he could expect
to make by me, but the prospect of establishing a connection with my
noble friend, whose immense expectations were well known to him.  In
pursuance of this proposal on the part of the Jew, about eight or nine
days after I had received the 10 pounds, I prepared to go down to Eton.
Nearly 3 pounds of the money I had given to my money-lending friend, on
his alleging that the stamps must be bought, in order that the writings
might be preparing whilst I was away from London.  I thought in my heart
that he was lying; but I did not wish to give him any excuse for charging
his own delays upon me.  A smaller sum I had given to my friend the
attorney (who was connected with the money-lenders as their lawyer), to
which, indeed, he was entitled for his unfurnished lodgings.  About
fifteen shillings I had employed in re-establishing (though in a very
humble way) my dress.  Of the remainder I gave one quarter to Ann,
meaning on my return to have divided with her whatever might remain.
These arrangements made, soon after six o'clock on a dark winter evening
I set off, accompanied by Ann, towards Piccadilly; for it was my
intention to go down as far as Salthill on the Bath or Bristol mail.  Our
course lay through a part of the town which has now all disappeared, so
that I can no longer retrace its ancient boundaries--Swallow Street, I
think it was called.  Having time enough before us, however, we bore away
to the left until we came into Golden Square; there, near the corner of
Sherrard Street, we sat down, not wishing to part in the tumult and blaze
of Piccadilly.  I had told her of my plans some time before, and I now
assured her again that she should share in my good fortune, if I met with
any, and that I would never forsake her as soon as I had power to protect
her.  This I fully intended, as much from inclination as from a sense of
duty; for setting aside gratitude, which in any case must have made me
her debtor for life, I loved her as affectionately as if she had been my
sister; and at this moment with sevenfold tenderness, from pity at
witnessing her extreme dejection.  I had apparently most reason for
dejection, because I was leaving the saviour of my life; yet I,
considering the shock my health had received, was cheerful and full of
hope.  She, on the contrary, who was parting with one who had had little
means of serving her, except by kindness and brotherly treatment, was
overcome by sorrow; so that, when I kissed her at our final farewell, she
put her arms about my neck and wept without speaking a word.  I hoped to
return in a week at farthest, and I agreed with her that on the fifth
night from that, and every night afterwards, she would wait for me at six
o'clock near the bottom of Great Titchfield Street, which had been our
customary haven, as it were, of rendezvous, to prevent our missing each
other in the great Mediterranean of Oxford Street.  This and other
measures of precaution I took; one only I forgot.  She had either never
told me, or (as a matter of no great interest) I had forgotten her
surname.  It is a general practice, indeed, with girls of humble rank in
her unhappy condition, not (as novel-reading women of higher pretensions)
to style themselves _Miss Douglas_, _Miss Montague_, &c., but simply by
their Christian names _Mary_, _Jane_, _Frances_, &c.  Her surname, as
the surest means of tracing her hereafter, I ought now to have inquired;
but the truth is, having no reason to think that our meeting could, in
consequence of a short interruption, be more difficult or uncertain than
it had been for so many weeks, I had scarcely for a moment adverted to it
as necessary, or placed it amongst my memoranda against this parting
interview; and my final anxieties being spent in comforting her with
hopes, and in pressing upon her the necessity of getting some medicines
for a violent cough and hoarseness with which she was troubled, I wholly
forgot it until it was too late to recall her.

It was past eight o'clock when I reached the Gloucester Coffee-house, and
the Bristol mail being on the point of going off, I mounted on the
outside.  The fine fluent motion of this mail soon laid me asleep: it
is somewhat remarkable that the first easy or refreshing sleep which I
had enjoyed for some months, was on the outside of a mail-coach--a bed
which at this day I find rather an uneasy one.  Connected with this sleep
was a little incident which served, as hundreds of others did at that
time, to convince me how easily a man who has never been in any great
distress may pass through life without knowing, in his own person at
least, anything of the possible goodness of the human heart--or, as I
must add with a sigh, of its possible vileness.  So thick a curtain of
_manners_ is drawn over the features and expression of men's _natures_,
that to the ordinary observer the two extremities, and the infinite field
of varieties which lie between them, are all confounded; the vast and
multitudinous compass of their several harmonies reduced to the meagre
outline of differences expressed in the gamut or alphabet of elementary
sounds.  The case was this: for the first four or five miles from London
I annoyed my fellow-passenger on the roof by occasionally falling against
him when the coach gave a lurch to his: side; and indeed, if the road had
been less smooth and level than it is, I should have fallen off from
weakness.  Of this annoyance he complained heavily, as perhaps, in the
same circumstances, most people would; he expressed his complaint,
however, more morosely than the occasion seemed to warrant, and if I had
parted with him at that moment I should have thought of him (if I had
considered it worth while to think of him at all) as a surly and almost
brutal fellow.  However, I was conscious that I had given him some cause
for complaint, and therefore I apologized to him, and assured him I would
do what I could to avoid falling asleep for the future; and at the same
time, in as few words as possible, I explained to him that I was ill and
in a weak state from long suffering, and that I could not afford at that
time to take an inside place.  This man's manner changed, upon hearing
this explanation, in an instant; and when I next woke for a minute from
the noise and lights of Hounslow (for in spite of my wishes and efforts I
had fallen asleep again within two minutes from the time I had spoken to
him) I found that he had put his arm round me to protect me from falling
off, and for the rest of my journey he behaved to me with the gentleness
of a woman, so that at length I almost lay in his arms; and this was the
more kind, as he could not have known that I was not going the whole way
to Bath or Bristol.  Unfortunately, indeed, I _did_ go rather farther
than I intended, for so genial and so refreshing was my sleep, that the
next time after leaving Hounslow that I fully awoke was upon the sudden
pulling up of the mail (possibly at a post-office), and on inquiry I
found that we had reached Maidenhead--six or seven miles, I think, ahead
of Salthill.  Here I alighted, and for the half-minute that the mail
stopped I was entreated by my friendly companion (who, from the transient
glimpse I had had of him in Piccadilly, seemed to me to be a gentleman's
butler, or person of that rank) to go to bed without delay.  This I
promised, though with no intention of doing so; and in fact I immediately
set forward, or rather backward, on foot.  It must then have been nearly
midnight, but so slowly did I creep along that I heard a clock in a
cottage strike four before I turned down the lane from Slough to Eton.
The air and the sleep had both refreshed me; but I was weary
nevertheless.  I remember a thought (obvious enough, and which has been
prettily expressed by a Roman poet) which gave me some consolation at
that moment under my poverty.  There had been some time before a murder
committed on or near Hounslow Heath.  I think I cannot be mistaken when I
say that the name of the murdered person was _Steele_, and that he was
the owner of a lavender plantation in that neighbourhood.  Every step of
my progress was bringing me nearer to the Heath, and it naturally
occurred to me that I and the accused murderer, if he were that night
abroad, might at every instant be unconsciously approaching each other
through the darkness; in which case, said I--supposing I, instead of
being (as indeed I am) little better than an outcast--

   Lord of my learning, and no land beside--

were, like my friend Lord ---, heir by general repute to 70,000 pounds
per annum, what a panic should I be under at this moment about my throat!
Indeed, it was not likely that Lord --- should ever be in my situation.
But nevertheless, the spirit of the remark remains true--that vast power
and possessions make a man shamefully afraid of dying; and I am convinced
that many of the most intrepid adventurers, who, by fortunately being
poor, enjoy the full use of their natural courage, would, if at the very
instant of going into action news were brought to them that they had
unexpectedly succeeded to an estate in England of 50,000 pounds a-year,
feel their dislike to bullets considerably sharpened, and their
efforts at perfect equanimity and self-possession proportionably
difficult.  So true it is, in the language of a wise man whose own
experience had made him acquainted with both fortunes, that riches are
better fitted

   To slacken virtue, and abate her edge,
   Than tempt her to do ought may merit praise.

I dally with my subject because, to myself, the remembrance of these
times is profoundly interesting.  But my reader shall not have any
further cause to complain, for I now hasten to its close.  In the road
between Slough and Eton I fell asleep, and just as the morning began to
dawn I was awakened by the voice of a man standing over me and surveying
me.  I know not what he was: he was an ill-looking fellow, but not
therefore of necessity an ill-meaning fellow; or, if he were, I suppose
he thought that no person sleeping out-of-doors in winter could be worth
robbing.  In which conclusion, however, as it regarded myself, I beg to
assure him, if he should be among my readers, that he was mistaken.  After
a slight remark he passed on; and I was not sorry at his disturbance, as
it enabled me to pass through Eton before people were generally up.  The
night had been heavy and lowering, but towards the morning it had changed
to a slight frost, and the ground and the trees were now covered with
rime.  I slipped through Eton unobserved; washed myself, and as far as
possible adjusted my dress, at a little public-house in Windsor; and
about eight o'clock went down towards Pote's.  On my road I met some
junior boys, of whom I made inquiries.  An Etonian is always a gentleman;
and, in spite of my shabby habiliments, they answered me civilly.  My
friend Lord --- was gone to the University of ---.  "Ibi omnis effusus
labor!"  I had, however, other friends at Eton; but it is not to all that
wear that name in prosperity that a man is willing to present himself in
distress.  On recollecting myself, however, I asked for the Earl of D---,
to whom (though my acquaintance with him was not so intimate as with some
others) I should not have shrunk from presenting myself under any
circumstances.  He was still at Eton, though I believe on the wing for
Cambridge.  I called, was received kindly, and asked to breakfast.

Here let me stop for a moment to check my reader from any erroneous
conclusions.  Because I have had occasion incidentally to speak of
various patrician friends, it must not be supposed that I have myself any
pretension to rank and high blood.  I thank God that I have not.  I am
the son of a plain English merchant, esteemed during his life for his
great integrity, and strongly attached to literary pursuits (indeed, he
was himself, anonymously, an author).  If he had lived it was expected
that he would have been very rich; but dying prematurely, he left no more
than about 30,000 pounds amongst seven different claimants.  My mother I
may mention with honour, as still more highly gifted; for though
unpretending to the name and honours of a _literary_ woman, I shall
presume to call her (what many literary women are not) an _intellectual_
woman; and I believe that if ever her letters should be collected and
published, they would be thought generally to exhibit as much strong and
masculine sense, delivered in as pure "mother English," racy and fresh
with idiomatic graces, as any in our language--hardly excepting those of
Lady M. W. Montague.  These are my honours of descent, I have no other;
and I have thanked God sincerely that I have not, because, in my
judgment, a station which raises a man too eminently above the level of
his fellow-creatures is not the most favourable to moral or to
intellectual qualities.

Lord D--- placed before me a most magnificent breakfast.  It was really
so; but in my eyes it seemed trebly magnificent, from being the first
regular meal, the first "good man's table," that I had sate down to for
months.  Strange to say, however, I could scarce eat anything.  On the
day when I first received my 10 pound bank-note I had gone to a baker's
shop and bought a couple of rolls; this very shop I had two months or six
weeks before surveyed with an eagerness of desire which it was almost
humiliating to me to recollect.  I remembered the story about Otway, and
feared that there might be danger in eating too rapidly.  But I had no
need for alarm; my appetite was quite sunk, and I became sick before I
had eaten half of what I had bought.  This effect from eating what
approached to a meal I continued to feel for weeks; or, when I did not
experience any nausea, part of what I ate was rejected, sometimes with
acidity, sometimes immediately and without any acidity.  On the present
occasion, at Lord D-'s table, I found myself not at all better than
usual, and in the midst of luxuries I had no appetite.  I had, however,
unfortunately, at all times a craving for wine; I explained my situation,
therefore, to Lord D---, and gave him a short account of my late
sufferings, at which he expressed great compassion, and called for wine.
This gave me a momentary relief and pleasure; and on all occasions when I
had an opportunity I never failed to drink wine, which I worshipped then
as I have since worshipped opium.  I am convinced, however, that this
indulgence in wine contributed to strengthen my malady, for the tone of
my stomach was apparently quite sunk, and by a better regimen it might
sooner, and perhaps effectually, have been revived.  I hope that it was
not from this love of wine that I lingered in the neighbourhood of my
Eton friends; I persuaded myself then that it was from reluctance to ask
of Lord D---, on whom I was conscious I had not sufficient claims, the
particular service in quest of which I had come down to Eton.  I was,
however unwilling to lose my journey, and--I asked it.  Lord D---, whose
good nature was unbounded, and which, in regard to myself, had been
measured rather by his compassion perhaps for my condition, and his
knowledge of my intimacy with some of his relatives, than by an
over-rigorous inquiry into the extent of my own direct claims, faltered,
nevertheless, at this request.  He acknowledged that he did not like to
have any dealings with money-lenders, and feared lest such a transaction
might come to the ears of his connexions.  Moreover, he doubted whether
_his_ signature, whose expectations were so much more bounded than those
of ---, would avail with my unchristian friends.  However, he did not
wish, as it seemed, to mortify me by an absolute refusal; for after a
little consideration he promised, under certain conditions which he
pointed out, to give his security.  Lord D--- was at this time not
eighteen years of age; but I have often doubted, on recollecting since
the good sense and prudence which on this occasion he mingled with so
much urbanity of manner (an urbanity which in him wore the grace of
youthful sincerity), whether any statesman--the oldest and the most
accomplished in diplomacy--could have acquitted himself better under the
same circumstances.  Most people, indeed, cannot be addressed on such a
business without surveying you with looks as austere and unpropitious as
those of a Saracen's head.

Recomforted by this promise, which was not quite equal to the best but
far above the worst that I had pictured to myself as possible, I returned
in a Windsor coach to London three days after I had quitted it.  And now
I come to the end of my story.  The Jews did not approve of Lord D---'s
terms; whether they would in the end have acceded to them, and were only
seeking time for making due inquiries, I know not; but many delays were
made, time passed on, the small fragment of my bank-note had just melted
away, and before any conclusion could have been put to the business I
must have relapsed into my former state of wretchedness.  Suddenly,
however, at this crisis, an opening was made, almost by accident, for
reconciliation with my friends; I quitted London in haste for a remote
part of England; after some time I proceeded to the university, and it
was not until many months had passed away that I had it in my power again
to revisit the ground which had become so interesting to me, and to this
day remains so, as the chief scene of my youthful sufferings.

Meantime, what had become of poor Ann?  For her I have reserved my
concluding words.  According to our agreement, I sought her daily, and
waited for her every night, so long as I stayed in London, at the corner
of Titchfield Street.  I inquired for her of every one who was likely to
know her, and during the last hours of my stay in London I put into
activity every means of tracing her that my knowledge of London suggested
and the limited extent of my power made possible.  The street where she
had lodged I knew, but not the house; and I remembered at last some
account which she had given me of ill-treatment from her landlord, which
made it probable that she had quitted those lodgings before we parted.
She had few acquaintances; most people, besides, thought that the
earnestness of my inquiries arose from motives which moved their laughter
or their slight regard; and others, thinking I was in chase of a girl who
had robbed me of some trifles, were naturally and excusably indisposed to
give me any clue to her, if indeed they had any to give.  Finally as my
despairing resource, on the day I left London I put into the hands of the
only person who (I was sure) must know Ann by sight, from having been in
company with us once or twice, an address to ---, in ---shire, at that
time the residence of my family.  But to this hour I have never heard a
syllable about her.  This, amongst such troubles as most men meet with in
this life, has been my heaviest affliction.  If she lived, doubtless we
must have been some time in search of each other, at the very same
moment, through the mighty labyrinths of London; perhaps even within a
few feet of each other--a barrier no wider than a London street often
amounting in the end to a separation for eternity!  During some years I
hoped that she _did_ live; and I suppose that, in the literal and
unrhetorical use of the word _myriad_, I may say that on my different
visits to London I have looked into many, many myriads of female faces,
in the hope of meeting her.  I should know her again amongst a thousand,
if I saw her for a moment; for though not handsome, she had a sweet
expression of countenance and a peculiar and graceful carriage of the
head.  I sought her, I have said, in hope.  So it was for years; but now
I should fear to see her; and her cough, which grieved me when I parted
with her, is now my consolation.  I now wish to see her no longer; but
think of her, more gladly, as one long since laid in the grave--in the
grave, I would hope, of a Magdalen; taken away, before injuries and
cruelty had blotted out and transfigured her ingenuous nature, or the
brutalities of ruffians had completed the ruin they had begun.

So then, Oxford Street, stony-hearted step-mother! thou that listenest to
the sighs of orphans and drinkest the tears of children, at length I was
dismissed from thee; the time was come at last that I no more should pace
in anguish thy never-ending terraces, no more should dream and wake in
captivity to the pangs of hunger.  Successors too many, to myself and
Ann, have doubtless since then trodden in our footsteps, inheritors of
our calamities; other orphans than Ann have sighed; tears have been shed
by other children; and thou, Oxford Street, hast since doubtless echoed
to the groans of innumerable hearts.  For myself, however, the storm
which I had outlived seemed to have been the pledge of a long
fair-weather--the premature sufferings which I had paid down to have been
accepted as a ransom for many years to come, as a price of long immunity
from sorrow; and if again I walked in London a solitary and contemplative
man (as oftentimes I did), I walked for the most part in serenity and
peace of mind.  And although it is true that the calamities of my
noviciate in London had struck root so deeply in my bodily constitution,
that afterwards they shot up and flourished afresh, and grew into a
noxious umbrage that has overshadowed and darkened my latter years, yet
these second assaults of suffering were met with a fortitude more
confirmed, with the resources of a maturer intellect, and with
alleviations from sympathising affection--how deep and tender!

Thus, however, with whatsoever alleviations, years that were far asunder
were bound together by subtle links of suffering derived from a common
root.  And herein I notice an instance of the short-sightedness of human
desires, that oftentimes on moonlight nights, during my first mournful
abode in London, my consolation was (if such it could be thought) to gaze
from Oxford Street up every avenue in succession which pierces through
the heart of Marylebone to the fields and the woods; for _that_, said I,
travelling with my eyes up the long vistas which lay part in light and
part in shade, "_that_ is the road to the North, and therefore to, and if
I had the wings of a dove, _that_ way I would fly for comfort."  Thus I
said, and thus I wished, in my blindness.  Yet even in that very northern
region it was, even in that very valley, nay, in that very house to which
my erroneous wishes pointed, that this second birth of my sufferings
began, and that they again threatened to besiege the citadel of life and
hope.  There it was that for years I was persecuted by visions as ugly,
and as ghastly phantoms as ever haunted the couch of an Orestes; and in
this unhappier than he, that sleep, which comes to all as a respite and a
restoration, and to him especially as a blessed balm for his wounded
heart and his haunted brain, visited me as my bitterest scourge.  Thus
blind was I in my desires; yet if a veil interposes between the
dim-sightedness of man and his future calamities, the same veil hides
from him their alleviations, and a grief which had not been feared is met
by consolations which had not been hoped.  I therefore, who participated,
as it were, in the troubles of Orestes (excepting only in his agitated
conscience), participated no less in all his supports.  My Eumenides,
like his, were at my bed-feet, and stared in upon me through the
curtains; but watching by my pillow, or defrauding herself of sleep to
bear me company through the heavy watches of the night, sate my Electra;
for thou, beloved M., dear companion of my later years, thou wast my
Electra! and neither in nobility of mind nor in long-suffering affection
wouldst permit that a Grecian sister should excel an English wife.  For
thou thoughtest not much to stoop to humble offices of kindness and to
servile ministrations of tenderest affection--to wipe away for years
the unwholesome dews upon the forehead, or to refresh the lips when
parched and baked with fever; nor even when thy own peaceful slumbers had
by long sympathy become infected with the spectacle of my dread contest
with phantoms and shadowy enemies that oftentimes bade me "sleep no
more!"--not even then didst thou utter a complaint or any murmur, nor
withdraw thy angelic smiles, nor shrink from thy service of love, more
than Electra did of old.  For she too, though she was a Grecian woman,
and the daughter of the king of men, yet wept sometimes, and hid her
face in her robe.

But these troubles are past; and thou wilt read records of a period so
dolorous to us both as the legend of some hideous dream that can return
no more.  Meantime, I am again in London, and again I pace the terraces
of Oxford Street by night; and oftentimes, when I am oppressed by
anxieties that demand all my philosophy and the comfort of thy presence
to support, and yet remember that I am separated from thee by three
hundred miles and the length of three dreary months, I look up the
streets that run northwards from Oxford Street, upon moonlight nights,
and recollect my youthful ejaculation of anguish; and remembering that
thou art sitting alone in that same valley, and mistress of that very
house to which my heart turned in its blindness nineteen years ago, I
think that, though blind indeed, and scattered to the winds of late, the
promptings of my heart may yet have had reference to a remoter time, and
may be justified if read in another meaning; and if I could allow myself
to descend again to the impotent wishes of childhood, I should again say
to myself, as I look to the North, "Oh, that I had the wings of a dove--"
and with how just a confidence in thy good and gracious nature might I
add the other half of my early ejaculation--"And _that_ way I would fly
for comfort!"

It is so long since I first took opium that if it had been a trifling
incident in my life I might have forgotten its date; but cardinal events
are not to be forgotten, and from circumstances connected with it I
remember that it must be referred to the autumn of 1804.  During that
season I was in London, having come thither for the first time since my
entrance at college.  And my introduction to opium arose in the following
way.  From an early age I had been accustomed to wash my head in cold
water at least once a day: being suddenly seized with toothache, I
attributed it to some relaxation caused by an accidental intermission of
that practice, jumped out of bed, plunged my head into a basin of cold
water, and with hair thus wetted went to sleep.  The next morning, as I
need hardly say, I awoke with excruciating rheumatic pains of the head
and face, from which I had hardly any respite for about twenty days.  On
the twenty-first day I think it was, and on a Sunday, that I went out
into the streets, rather to run away, if possible, from my torments, than
with any distinct purpose.  By accident I met a college acquaintance, who
recommended opium.  Opium! dread agent of unimaginable pleasure and pain!
I had heard of it as I had of manna or of ambrosia, but no further.  How
unmeaning a sound was it at that time: what solemn chords does it now
strike upon my heart! what heart-quaking vibrations of sad and happy
remembrances!  Reverting for a moment to these, I feel a mystic
importance attached to the minutest circumstances connected with the
place and the time and the man (if man he was) that first laid open to me
the Paradise of Opium-eaters.  It was a Sunday afternoon, wet and
cheerless: and a duller spectacle this earth of ours has not to show than
a rainy Sunday in London.  My road homewards lay through Oxford Street;
and near "the stately Pantheon" (as Mr. Wordsworth has obligingly called
it) I saw a druggist's shop.  The druggist--unconscious minister of
celestial pleasures!--as if in sympathy with the rainy Sunday, looked
dull and stupid, just as any mortal druggist might be expected to look on
a Sunday; and when I asked for the tincture of opium, he gave it to me as
any other man might do, and furthermore, out of my shilling returned me
what seemed to be real copper halfpence, taken out of a real wooden
drawer.  Nevertheless, in spite of such indications of humanity, he has
ever since existed in my mind as the beatific vision of an immortal
druggist, sent down to earth on a special mission to myself.  And it
confirms me in this way of considering him, that when I next came up to
London I sought him near the stately Pantheon, and found him not; and
thus to me, who knew not his name (if indeed he had one), he seemed
rather to have vanished from Oxford Street than to have removed in any
bodily fashion.  The reader may choose to think of him as possibly no
more than a sublunary druggist; it may be so, but my faith is better--I
believe him to have evanesced, or evaporated.  So unwillingly would
I connect any mortal remembrances with that hour, and place, and
creature, that first brought me acquainted with the celestial drug.

Arrived at my lodgings, it may be supposed that I lost not a moment in
taking the quantity prescribed.  I was necessarily ignorant of the whole
art and mystery of opium-taking, and what I took I took under every
disadvantage.  But I took it--and in an hour--oh, heavens! what a
revulsion! what an upheaving, from its lowest depths, of inner spirit!
what an apocalypse of the world within me!  That my pains had vanished
was now a trifle in my eyes: this negative effect was swallowed up in the
immensity of those positive effects which had opened before me--in the
abyss of divine enjoyment thus suddenly revealed.  Here was a panacea, a
for all human woes; here was the secret of happiness, about
which philosophers had disputed for so many ages, at once discovered:
happiness might now be bought for a penny, and carried in the waistcoat
pocket; portable ecstacies might be had corked up in a pint bottle, and
peace of mind could be sent down in gallons by the mail-coach.  But if I
talk in this way the reader will think I am laughing, and I can assure
him that nobody will laugh long who deals much with opium: its pleasures
even are of a grave and solemn complexion, and in his happiest state the
opium-eater cannot present himself in the character of _L'Allegro_: even
then he speaks and thinks as becomes _Il Penseroso_.  Nevertheless, I
have a very reprehensible way of jesting at times in the midst of my own
misery; and unless when I am checked by some more powerful feelings, I am
afraid I shall be guilty of this indecent practice even in these annals
of suffering or enjoyment.  The reader must allow a little to my infirm
nature in this respect; and with a few indulgences of that sort I shall
endeavour to be as grave, if not drowsy, as fits a theme like opium, so
anti-mercurial as it really is, and so drowsy as it is falsely reputed.

And first, one word with respect to its bodily effects; for upon all that
has been hitherto written on the subject of opium, whether by travellers
in Turkey (who may plead their privilege of lying as an old immemorial
right), or by professors of medicine, writing _ex cathedra_, I have but
one emphatic criticism to pronounce--Lies! lies! lies!  I remember once,
in passing a book-stall, to have caught these words from a page of some
satiric author: "By this time I became convinced that the London
newspapers spoke truth at least twice a week, viz., on Tuesday and
Saturday, and might safely be depended upon for--the list of bankrupts."
In like manner, I do by no means deny that some truths have been
delivered to the world in regard to opium.  Thus it has been repeatedly
affirmed by the learned that opium is a dusky brown in colour; and this,
take notice, I grant.  Secondly, that it is rather dear, which also I
grant, for in my time East Indian opium has been three guineas a pound,
and Turkey eight.  And thirdly, that if you eat a good deal of it, most
probably you must--do what is particularly disagreeable to any man of
regular habits, viz., die. These weighty propositions are, all and
singular, true: I cannot gainsay them, and truth ever was, and will be,
commendable.  But in these three theorems I believe we have exhausted the
stock of knowledge as yet accumulated by men on the subject of opium.

And therefore, worthy doctors, as there seems to be room for further
discoveries, stand aside, and allow me to come forward and lecture on
this matter.

First, then, it is not so much affirmed as taken for granted, by all who
ever mention opium, formally or incidentally, that it does or can produce
intoxication.  Now, reader, assure yourself, _meo perieulo_, that no
quantity of opium ever did or could intoxicate.  As to the tincture of
opium (commonly called laudanum) _that_ might certainly intoxicate if a
man could bear to take enough of it; but why?  Because it contains so
much proof spirit, and not because it contains so much opium.  But crude
opium, I affirm peremptorily, is incapable of producing any state of body
at all resembling that which is produced by alcohol, and not in _degree_
only incapable, but even in _kind_: it is not in the quantity of its
effects merely, but in the quality, that it differs altogether.  The
pleasure given by wine is always mounting and tending to a crisis, after
which it declines; that from opium, when once generated, is stationary
for eight or ten hours: the first, to borrow a technical distinction from
medicine, is a case of acute--the second, the chronic pleasure; the one
is a flame, the other a steady and equable glow.  But the main
distinction lies in this, that whereas wine disorders the mental
faculties, opium, on the contrary (if taken in a proper manner),
introduces amongst them the most exquisite order, legislation, and
harmony.  Wine robs a man of his self-possession; opium greatly
invigorates it.  Wine unsettles and clouds the judgement, and gives a
preternatural brightness and a vivid exaltation to the contempts and the
admirations, the loves and the hatreds of the drinker; opium, on the
contrary, communicates serenity and equipoise to all the faculties,
active or passive, and with respect to the temper and moral feelings in
general it gives simply that sort of vital warmth which is approved by
the judgment, and which would probably always accompany a bodily
constitution of primeval or antediluvian health.  Thus, for instance,
opium, like wine, gives an expansion to the heart and the benevolent
affections; but then, with this remarkable difference, that in the sudden
development of kind-heartedness which accompanies inebriation there is
always more or less of a maudlin character, which exposes it to the
contempt of the bystander.  Men shake hands, swear eternal friendship,
and shed tears, no mortal knows why; and the sensual creature is clearly
uppermost.  But the expansion of the benigner feelings incident to opium
is no febrile access, but a healthy restoration to that state which the
mind would naturally recover upon the removal of any deep-seated
irritation of pain that had disturbed and quarrelled with the impulses of
a heart originally just and good.  True it is that even wine, up to a
certain point and with certain men, rather tends to exalt and to steady
the intellect; I myself, who have never been a great wine-drinker, used
to find that half-a-dozen glasses of wine advantageously affected the
faculties--brightened and intensified the consciousness, and gave to the
mind a feeling of being "ponderibus librata suis;" and certainly it is
most absurdly said, in popular language, of any man that he is
_disguised_ in liquor; for, on the contrary, most men are disguised by
sobriety, and it is when they are drinking (as some old gentleman says in
Athenaeus), that men [Greek text]--display themselves in their true
complexion of character, which surely is not disguising themselves.  But
still, wine constantly leads a man to the brink of absurdity and
extravagance, and beyond a certain point it is sure to volatilise and to
disperse the intellectual energies: whereas opium always seems to compose
what had been agitated, and to concentrate what had been distracted.  In
short, to sum up all in one word, a man who is inebriated, or tending to
inebriation, is, and feels that he is, in a condition which calls up into
supremacy the merely human, too often the brutal part of his nature; but
the opium-eater (I speak of him who is not suffering from any disease or
other remote effects of opium) feels that the divines part of his nature
is paramount; that is, the moral affections are in a state of cloudless
serenity, and over all is the great light of the majestic intellect.

This is the doctrine of the true church on the subject of opium: of which
church I acknowledge myself to be the only member--the alpha and the
omega: but then it is to be recollected that I speak from the ground of a
large and profound personal experience: whereas most of the unscientific
authors who have at all treated of opium, and even of those who have
written expressly on the materia medica, make it evident, from the horror
they express of it, that their experimental knowledge of its action is
none at all.  I will, however, candidly acknowledge that I have met with
one person who bore evidence to its intoxicating power, such as staggered
my own incredulity; for he was a surgeon, and had himself taken opium
largely.  I happened to say to him that his enemies (as I had heard)
charged him with talking nonsense on politics, and that his friends
apologized for him by suggesting that he was constantly in a state of
intoxication from opium.  Now the accusation, said I, is not _prima
facie_ and of necessity an absurd one; but the defence _is_.  To my
surprise, however, he insisted that both his enemies and his friends were
in the right.  "I will maintain," said he, "that I _do_ talk nonsense;
and secondly, I will maintain that I do not talk nonsense upon principle,
or with any view to profit, but solely and simply, said he, solely and
simply--solely and simply (repeating it three times over), because I am
drunk with opium, and _that_ daily."  I replied that, as to the
allegation of his enemies, as it seemed to be established upon such
respectable testimony, seeing that the three parties concerned all agree
in it, it did not become me to question it; but the defence set up I must
demur to.  He proceeded to discuss the matter, and to lay down his
reasons; but it seemed to me so impolite to pursue an argument which must
have presumed a man mistaken in a point belonging to his own profession,
that I did not press him even when his course of argument seemed open to
objection; not to mention that a man who talks nonsense, even though
"with no view to profit," is not altogether the most agreeable partner in
a dispute, whether as opponent or respondent.  I confess, however, that
the authority of a surgeon, and one who was reputed a good one, may seem
a weighty one to my prejudice; but still I must plead my experience,
which was greater than his greatest by 7,000 drops a-day; and though it
was not possible to suppose a medical man unacquainted with the
characteristic symptoms of vinous intoxication, it yet struck me that he
might proceed on a logical error of using the word intoxication with too
great latitude, and extending it generically to all modes of nervous
excitement, instead of restricting it as the expression for a specific
sort of excitement connected with certain diagnostics.  Some people have
maintained in my hearing that they had been drunk upon green tea; and a
medical student in London, for whose knowledge in his profession I have
reason to feel great respect, assured me the other day that a patient in
recovering from an illness had got drunk on a beef-steak.

Having dwelt so much on this first and leading error in respect to opium,
I shall notice very briefly a second and a third, which are, that the
elevation of spirits produced by opium is necessarily followed by a
proportionate depression, and that the natural and even immediate
consequence of opium is torpor and stagnation, animal and mental.  The
first of these errors I shall content myself with simply denying;
assuring my reader that for ten years, during which I took opium at
intervals, the day succeeding to that on which I allowed myself this
luxury was always a day of unusually good spirits.

With respect to the torpor supposed to follow, or rather (if we were to
credit the numerous pictures of Turkish opium-eaters) to accompany the
practice of opium-eating, I deny that also.  Certainly opium is classed
under the head of narcotics, and some such effect it may produce in the
end; but the primary effects of opium are always, and in the highest
degree, to excite and stimulate the system.  This first stage of its
action always lasted with me, during my noviciate, for upwards of eight
hours; so that it must be the fault of the opium-eater himself if he does
not so time his exhibition of the dose (to speak medically) as that the
whole weight of its narcotic influence may descend upon his sleep.
Turkish opium-eaters, it seems, are absurd enough to sit, like so many
equestrian statues, on logs of wood as stupid as themselves.  But that
the reader may judge of the degree in which opium is likely to stupefy
the faculties of an Englishman, I shall (by way of treating the question
illustratively, rather than argumentatively) describe the way in which I
myself often passed an opium evening in London during the period between
1804-1812.  It will be seen that at least opium did not move me to seek
solitude, and much less to seek inactivity, or the torpid state of self-
involution ascribed to the Turks.  I give this account at the risk of
being pronounced a crazy enthusiast or visionary; but I regard _that_
little.  I must desire my reader to bear in mind that I was a hard
student, and at severe studies for all the rest of my time; and certainly
I had a right occasionally to relaxations as well as other people.  These,
however, I allowed myself but seldom.

The late Duke of --- used to say, "Next Friday, by the blessing of
heaven, I purpose to be drunk;" and in like manner I used to fix
beforehand how often within a given time, and when, I would commit a
debauch of opium.  This was seldom more than once in three weeks, for at
that time I could not have ventured to call every day, as I did
afterwards, for "_a glass of laudanum negus, warm, and without sugar_."
No, as I have said, I seldom drank laudanum, at that time, more than once
in three weeks: This was usually on a Tuesday or a Saturday night; my
reason for which was this.  In those days Grassini sang at the Opera, and
her voice was delightful to me beyond all that I had ever heard.  I know
not what may be the state of the Opera-house now, having never been
within its walls for seven or eight years, but at that time it was by
much the most pleasant place of public resort in London for passing an
evening.  Five shillings admitted one to the gallery, which was subject
to far less annoyance than the pit of the theatres; the orchestra was
distinguished by its sweet and melodious grandeur from all English
orchestras, the composition of which, I confess, is not acceptable to my
ear, from the predominance of the clamorous instruments and the absolute
tyranny of the violin.  The choruses were divine to hear, and when
Grassini appeared in some interlude, as she often did, and poured forth
her passionate soul as Andromache at the tomb of Hector, &c., I question
whether any Turk, of all that ever entered the Paradise of Opium-eaters,
can have had half the pleasure I had.  But, indeed, I honour the
barbarians too much by supposing them capable of any pleasures
approaching to the intellectual ones of an Englishman.  For music is an
intellectual or a sensual pleasure according to the temperament of him
who hears it.  And, by-the-bye, with the exception of the fine
extravaganza on that subject in "Twelfth Night," I do not recollect more
than one thing said adequately on the subject of music in all literature;
it is a passage in the _Religio Medici of Sir T. Brown, and though
chiefly remarkable for its sublimity, has also a philosophic value,
inasmuch as it points to the true theory of musical effects.  The mistake
of most people is to suppose that it is by the ear they communicate with
music, and therefore that they are purely passive to its effects.  But
this is not so; it is by the reaction of the mind upon the notices of the
ear (the _matter_ coming by the senses, the _form_ from the mind) that
the pleasure is constructed, and therefore it is that people of equally
good ear differ so much in this point from one another.  Now, opium, by
greatly increasing the activity of the mind, generally increases, of
necessity, that particular mode of its activity by which we are able to
construct out of the raw material of organic sound an elaborate
intellectual pleasure.  But, says a friend, a succession of musical
sounds is to me like a collection of Arabic characters; I can attach no
ideas to them.  Ideas! my good sir?  There is no occasion for them; all
that class of ideas which can be available in such a case has a language
of representative feelings.  But this is a subject foreign to my present
purposes; it is sufficient to say that a chorus, &c., of elaborate
harmony displayed before me, as in a piece of arras work, the whole of my
past life--not as if recalled by an act of memory, but as if present and
incarnated in the music; no longer painful to dwell upon; but the detail
of its incidents removed or blended in some hazy abstraction, and its
passions exalted, spiritualized, and sublimed.  All this was to be had
for five shillings.  And over and above the music of the stage and the
orchestra, I had all around me, in the intervals of the performance, the
music of the Italian language talked by Italian women--for the gallery
was usually crowded with Italians--and I listened with a pleasure such as
that with which Weld the traveller lay and listened, in Canada, to the
sweet laughter of Indian women; for the less you understand of a
language, the more sensible you are to the melody or harshness of its
sounds.  For such a purpose, therefore, it was an advantage to me that I
was a poor Italian scholar, reading it but little, and not speaking it at
all, nor understanding a tenth part of what I heard spoken.

These were my opera pleasures; but another pleasure I had which, as it
could be had only on a Saturday night, occasionally struggled with my
love of the Opera; for at that time Tuesday and Saturday were the regular
opera nights.  On this subject I am afraid I shall be rather obscure, but
I can assure the reader not at all more so than Marinus in his Life of
Proclus, or many other biographers and autobiographers of fair
reputation.  This pleasure, I have said, was to be had only on a Saturday
night.  What, then, was Saturday night to me more than any other night?  I
had no labours that I rested from, no wages to receive; what needed I to
care for Saturday night, more than as it was a summons to hear Grassini?
True, most logical reader; what you say is unanswerable.  And yet so it
was and is, that whereas different men throw their feelings into
different channels, and most are apt to show their interest in the
concerns of the poor chiefly by sympathy, expressed in some shape or
other, with their distresses and sorrows, I at that time was disposed to
express my interest by sympathising with their pleasures.  The pains of
poverty I had lately seen too much of, more than I wished to remember;
but the pleasures of the poor, their consolations of spirit, and their
reposes from bodily toil, can never become oppressive to contemplate.  Now
Saturday night is the season for the chief, regular, and periodic return
of rest of the poor; in this point the most hostile sects unite, and
acknowledge a common link of brotherhood; almost all Christendom rests
from its labours.  It is a rest introductory to another rest, and divided
by a whole day and two nights from the renewal of toil.  On this account
I feel always, on a Saturday night, as though I also were released from
some yoke of labour, had some wages to receive, and some luxury of repose
to enjoy.  For the sake, therefore, of witnessing, upon as large a scale
as possible, a spectacle with which my sympathy was so entire, I used
often on Saturday nights, after I had taken opium, to wander forth,
without much regarding the direction or the distance, to all the markets
and other parts of London to which the poor resort of a Saturday night,
for laying out their wages.  Many a family party, consisting of a man,
his wife, and sometimes one or two of his children, have I listened to,
as they stood consulting on their ways and means, or the strength of
their exchequer, or the price of household articles.  Gradually I became
familiar with their wishes, their difficulties, and their opinions.
Sometimes there might be heard murmurs of discontent, but far oftener
expressions on the countenance, or uttered in words, of patience, hope,
and tranquillity.  And taken generally, I must say that, in this point at
least, the poor are more philosophic than the rich--that they show a more
ready and cheerful submission to what they consider as irremediable evils
or irreparable losses.  Whenever I saw occasion, or could do it without
appearing to be intrusive, I joined their parties, and gave my opinion
upon the matter in discussion, which, if not always judicious, was always
received indulgently.  If wages were a little higher or expected to be
so, or the quartern loaf a little lower, or it was reported that onions
and butter were expected to fall, I was glad; yet, if the contrary were
true, I drew from opium some means of consoling myself.  For opium (like
the bee, that extracts its materials indiscriminately from roses and from
the soot of chimneys) can overrule all feelings into compliance with the
master-key.  Some of these rambles led me to great distances, for an
opium-eater is too happy to observe the motion of time; and sometimes in
my attempts to steer homewards, upon nautical principles, by fixing my
eye on the pole-star, and seeking ambitiously for a north-west passage,
instead of circumnavigating all the capes and head-lands I had doubled in
my outward voyage, I came suddenly upon such knotty problems of alleys,
such enigmatical entries, and such sphynx's riddles of streets without
thoroughfares, as must, I conceive, baffle the audacity of porters and
confound the intellects of hackney-coachmen.  I could almost have
believed at times that I must be the first discoverer of some of these
_terrae incognitae_, and doubted whether they had yet been laid down in
the modern charts of London.  For all this, however, I paid a heavy price
in distant years, when the human face tyrannised over my dreams, and the
perplexities of my steps in London came back and haunted my sleep, with
the feeling of perplexities, moral and intellectual, that brought
confusion to the reason, or anguish and remorse to the conscience.

Thus I have shown that opium does not of necessity produce inactivity or
torpor, but that, on the contrary, it often led me into markets and
theatres.  Yet, in candour, I will admit that markets and theatres are
not the appropriate haunts of the opium-eater when in the divinest state
incident to his enjoyment.  In that state, crowds become an oppression to
him; music even, too sensual and gross.  He naturally seeks solitude and
silence, as indispensable conditions of those trances, or profoundest
reveries, which are the crown and consummation of what opium can do for
human nature.  I, whose disease it was to meditate too much and to
observe too little, and who upon my first entrance at college was nearly
falling into a deep melancholy, from brooding too much on the sufferings
which I had witnessed in London, was sufficiently aware of the tendencies
of my own thoughts to do all I could to counteract them.  I was, indeed,
like a person who, according to the old legend, had entered the cave of
Trophonius; and the remedies I sought were to force myself into society,
and to keep my understanding in continual activity upon matters of
science.  But for these remedies I should certainly have become
hypochondriacally melancholy.  In after years, however, when my
cheerfulness was more fully re-established, I yielded to my natural
inclination for a solitary life.  And at that time I often fell into
these reveries upon taking opium; and more than once it has happened to
me, on a summer night, when I have been at an open window, in a room from
which I could overlook the sea at a mile below me, and could command a
view of the great town of L---, at about the same distance, that I have
sate from sunset to sunrise, motionless, and without wishing to move.

I shall be charged with mysticism, Behmenism, quietism, &c., but _that_
shall not alarm me.  Sir H. Vane, the younger, was one of our wisest men;
and let my reader see if he, in his philosophical works, be half as
unmystical as I am.  I say, then, that it has often struck me that the
scene itself was somewhat typical of what took place in such a reverie.
The town of L--- represented the earth, with its sorrows and its graves
left behind, yet not out of sight, nor wholly forgotten.  The ocean, in
everlasting but gentle agitation, and brooded over by a dove-like calm,
might not unfitly typify the mind and the mood which then swayed it.  For
it seemed to me as if then first I stood at a distance and aloof from the
uproar of life; as if the tumult, the fever, and the strife were
suspended; a respite granted from the secret burthens of the heart; a
sabbath of repose; a resting from human labours.  Here were the hopes
which blossom in the paths of life reconciled with the peace which is in
the grave; motions of the intellect as unwearied as the heavens, yet for
all anxieties a halcyon calm; a tranquillity that seemed no product of
inertia, but as if resulting from mighty and equal antagonisms; infinite
activities, infinite repose.

Oh, just, subtle, and mighty opium! that to the hearts of poor and rich
alike, for the wounds that will never heal, and for "the pangs that tempt
the spirit to rebel," bringest an assuaging balm; eloquent opium! that
with thy potent rhetoric stealest away the purposes of wrath; and to the
guilty man for one night givest back the hopes of his youth, and hands
washed pure from blood; and to the proud man a brief oblivion for

   Wrongs undress'd and insults unavenged;

that summonest to the chancery of dreams, for the triumphs of suffering
innocence, false witnesses; and confoundest perjury, and dost reverse the
sentences of unrighteous judges;--thou buildest upon the bosom of
darkness, out of the fantastic imagery of the brain, cities and temples
beyond the art of Phidias and Praxiteles--beyond the splendour of Babylon
and Hekatompylos, and "from the anarchy of dreaming sleep" callest into
sunny light the faces of long-buried beauties and the blessed household
countenances cleansed from the "dishonours of the grave."  Thou only
givest these gifts to man; and thou hast the keys of Paradise, oh, just,
subtle, and mighty opium!

Courteous, and I hope indulgent, reader (for all _my_ readers must be
indulgent ones, or else I fear I shall shock them too much to count on
their courtesy), having accompanied me thus far, now let me request you
to move onwards for about eight years; that is to say, from 1804 (when I
have said that my acquaintance with opium first began) to 1812.  The
years of academic life are now over and gone--almost forgotten; the
student's cap no longer presses my temples; if my cap exist at all, it
presses those of some youthful scholar, I trust, as happy as myself, and
as passionate a lover of knowledge.  My gown is by this time, I dare say,
in the same condition with many thousand excellent books in the Bodleian,
viz., diligently perused by certain studious moths and worms; or
departed, however (which is all that I know of his fate), to that great
reservoir of _somewhere_ to which all the tea-cups, tea-caddies,
tea-pots, tea-kettles, &c., have departed (not to speak of still frailer
vessels, such as glasses, decanters, bed-makers, &c.), which occasional
resemblances in the present generation of tea-cups, &c., remind me of
having once possessed, but of whose departure and final fate I, in common
with most gownsmen of either university, could give, I suspect, but an
obscure and conjectural history.  The persecutions of the chapel-bell,
sounding its unwelcome summons to six o'clock matins, interrupts my
slumbers no longer, the porter who rang it, upon whose beautiful nose
(bronze, inlaid with copper) I wrote, in retaliation so many Greek
epigrams whilst I was dressing, is dead, and has ceased to disturb
anybody; and I, and many others who suffered much from his tintinnabulous
propensities, have now agreed to overlook his errors, and have forgiven
him.  Even with the bell I am now in charity; it rings, I suppose, as
formerly, thrice a-day, and cruelly annoys, I doubt not, many worthy
gentlemen, and disturbs their peace of mind; but as to me, in this year
1812, I regard its treacherous voice no longer (treacherous I call it,
for, by some refinement of malice, it spoke in as sweet and silvery tones
as if it had been inviting one to a party); its tones have no longer,
indeed, power to reach me, let the wind sit as favourable as the malice
of the bell itself could wish, for I am 250 miles away from it, and
buried in the depth of mountains.  And what am I doing among the
mountains?  Taking opium.  Yes; but what else?  Why reader, in 1812, the
year we are now arrived at, as well as for some years previous, I have
been chiefly studying German metaphysics in the writings of Kant, Fichte,
Schelling, &c.  And how and in what manner do I live?--in short, what
class or description of men do I belong to?  I am at this period--viz. in
1812--living in a cottage and with a single female servant (_honi soit
qui mal y pense_), who amongst my neighbours passes by the name of my
"housekeeper."  And as a scholar and a man of learned education, and in
that sense a gentleman, I may presume to class myself as an unworthy
member of that indefinite body called _gentlemen_.  Partly on the ground
I have assigned perhaps, partly because from my having no visible calling
or business, it is rightly judged that I must be living on my private
fortune; I am so classed by my neighbours; and by the courtesy of modern
England I am usually addressed on letters, &c., "Esquire," though having,
I fear, in the rigorous construction of heralds, but slender pretensions
to that distinguished honour; yet in popular estimation I am X. Y. Z.,
Esquire, but not justice of the Peace nor Custos Rotulorum.  Am I
married?  Not yet.  And I still take opium?  On Saturday nights.  And
perhaps have taken it unblushingly ever since "the rainy Sunday," and
"the stately Pantheon," and "the beatific druggist" of 1804?  Even so.
And how do I find my health after all this opium-eating?  In short, how
do I do?  Why, pretty well, I thank you, reader; in the phrase of ladies
in the straw, "as well as can be expected."  In fact, if I dared to say
the real and simple truth, though, to satisfy the theories of medical
men, I _ought_ to be ill, I never was better in my life than in the
spring of 1812; and I hope sincerely that the quantity of claret, port,
or "particular Madeira," which in all probability you, good reader, have
taken, and design to take for every term of eight years during your
natural life, may as little disorder your health as mine was disordered
by the opium I had taken for eight years, between 1804 and 1812.  Hence
you may see again the danger of taking any medical advice from
_Anastasius_; in divinity, for aught I know, or law, he may be a safe
counsellor; but not in medicine.  No; it is far better to consult Dr.
Buchan, as I did; for I never forgot that worthy man's excellent
suggestion, and I was "particularly careful not to take above five-and-
twenty ounces of laudanum."  To this moderation and temperate use of the
article I may ascribe it, I suppose, that as yet, at least (_i.e_. in
1812), I am ignorant and unsuspicious of the avenging terrors which opium
has in store for those who abuse its lenity.  At the same time, it must
not be forgotten that hitherto I have been only a dilettante eater of
opium; eight years' practice even, with a single precaution of allowing
sufficient intervals between every indulgence, has not been sufficient to
make opium necessary to me as an article of daily diet.  But now comes a
different era.  Move on, if you please, reader, to 1813.  In the summer
of the year we have just quitted I have suffered much in bodily health
from distress of mind connected with a very melancholy event.  This event
being no ways related to the subject now before me, further than through
the bodily illness which it produced, I need not more particularly
notice.  Whether this illness of 1812 had any share in that of 1813 I
know not; but so it was, that in the latter year I was attacked by a most
appalling irritation of the stomach, in all respects the same as that
which had caused me so much suffering in youth, and accompanied by a
revival of all the old dreams.  This is the point of my narrative on
which, as respects my own self-justification, the whole of what follows
may be said to hinge.  And here I find myself in a perplexing dilemma.
Either, on the one hand, I must exhaust the reader's patience by such a
detail of my malady, or of my struggles with it, as might suffice to
establish the fact of my inability to wrestle any longer with irritation
and constant suffering; or, on the other hand, by passing lightly over
this critical part of my story, I must forego the benefit of a stronger
impression left on the mind of the reader, and must lay myself open to
the misconstruction of having slipped, by the easy and gradual steps of
self-indulging persons, from the first to the final stage of opium-eating
(a misconstruction to which there will be a lurking predisposition in
most readers, from my previous acknowledgements).  This is the dilemma,
the first horn of which would be sufficient to toss and gore any column
of patient readers, though drawn up sixteen deep and constantly relieved
by fresh men; consequently that is not to be thought of.  It remains,
then, that I _postulale_ so much as is necessary for my purpose.  And let
me take as full credit for what I postulate as if I had demonstrated it,
good reader, at the expense of your patience and my own.  Be not so
ungenerous as to let me suffer in your good opinion through my own
forbearance and regard for your comfort.  No; believe all that I ask of
you--viz., that I could resist no longer; believe it liberally and as an
act of grace, or else in mere prudence; for if not, then in the next
edition of my Opium Confessions, revised and enlarged, I will make you
believe and tremble; and _a force d'ennuyer_, by mere dint of
pandiculation I will terrify all readers of mine from ever again
questioning any postulate that I shall think fit to make.

This, then, let me repeat, I postulate--that at the time I began to take
opium daily I could not have done otherwise.  Whether, indeed, afterwards
I might not have succeeded in breaking off the habit, even when it seemed
to me that all efforts would be unavailing, and whether many of the
innumerable efforts which I did make might not have been carried much
further, and my gradual reconquests of ground lost might not have been
followed up much more energetically--these are questions which I must
decline.  Perhaps I might make out a case of palliation; but shall I
speak ingenuously?  I confess it, as a besetting infirmity of mine, that
I am too much of an Eudaemonist; I hanker too much after a state of
happiness, both for myself and others; I cannot face misery, whether my
own or not, with an eye of sufficient firmness, and am little capable of
encountering present pain for the sake of any reversionary benefit.  On
some other matters I can agree with the gentlemen in the cotton trade
at Manchester in affecting the Stoic philosophy, but not in this.
Here I take the liberty of an Eclectic philosopher, and I look out for
some courteous and considerate sect that will condescend more to the
infirm condition of an opium-eater; that are "sweet men," as Chaucer
says, "to give absolution," and will show some conscience in the penances
they inflict, and the efforts of abstinence they exact from poor sinners
like myself.  An inhuman moralist I can no more endure in my nervous
state than opium that has not been boiled.  At any rate, he who summons
me to send out a large freight of self-denial and mortification upon any
cruising voyage of moral improvement, must make it clear to my
understanding that the concern is a hopeful one.  At my time of life (six-
and-thirty years of age) it cannot be supposed that I have much energy to
spare; in fact, I find it all little enough for the intellectual labours
I have on my hands, and therefore let no man expect to frighten me by a
few hard words into embarking any part of it upon desperate adventures of
morality.

Whether desperate or not, however, the issue of the struggle in 1813 was
what I have mentioned, and from this date the reader is to consider me as
a regular and confirmed opium-eater, of whom to ask whether on any
particular day he had or had not taken opium, would be to ask whether his
lungs had performed respiration, or the heart fulfilled its functions.
You understand now, reader, what I am, and you are by this time aware
that no old gentleman "with a snow-white beard" will have any chance of
persuading me to surrender "the little golden receptacle of the
pernicious drug."  No; I give notice to all, whether moralists or
surgeons, that whatever be their pretensions and skill in their
respective lines of practice, they must not hope for any countenance from
me, if they think to begin by any savage proposition for a Lent or a
Ramadan of abstinence from opium.  This, then, being all fully understood
between us, we shall in future sail before the wind.  Now then, reader,
from 1813, where all this time we have been sitting down and loitering,
rise up, if you please, and walk forward about three years more.  Now
draw up the curtain, and you shall see me in a new character.

If any man, poor or rich, were to say that he would tell us what had been
the happiest day in his life, and the why and the wherefore, I suppose
that we should all cry out--Hear him!  Hear him!  As to the happiest
_day_, that must be very difficult for any wise man to name, because any
event that could occupy so distinguished a place in a man's retrospect of
his life, or be entitled to have shed a special felicity on any one day,
ought to be of such an enduring character as that (accidents apart) it
should have continued to shed the same felicity, or one not
distinguishably less, on many years together.  To the happiest _lustrum_,
however, or even to the happiest _year_, it may be allowed to any man to
point without discountenance from wisdom.  This year, in my case, reader,
was the one which we have now reached; though it stood, I confess, as a
parenthesis between years of a gloomier character.  It was a year of
brilliant water (to speak after the manner of jewellers), set as it were,
and insulated, in the gloom and cloudy melancholy of opium.  Strange as
it may sound, I had a little before this time descended suddenly, and
without any considerable effort, from 320 grains of opium (_i.e_. eight
thousand drops of laudanum) per day, to forty grains, or one-eighth
part.  Instantaneously, and as if by magic, the cloud of profoundest
melancholy which rested upon my brain, like some black vapours that I
have seen roll away from the summits of mountains, drew off in one day
([Greek text]); passed off with its murky banners as simultaneously as a
ship that has been stranded, and is floated off by a spring tide--

   That moveth altogether, if it move at all.

Now, then, I was again happy; I now took only 1000 drops of laudanum per
day; and what was that?  A latter spring had come to close up the season
of youth; my brain performed its functions as healthily as ever before; I
read Kant again, and again I understood him, or fancied that I did.  Again
my feelings of pleasure expanded themselves to all around me; and if any
man from Oxford or Cambridge, or from neither, had been announced to me
in my unpretending cottage, I should have welcomed him with as sumptuous
a reception as so poor a man could offer.  Whatever else was wanting to a
wise man's happiness, of laudanum I would have given him as much as he
wished, and in a golden cup.  And, by the way, now that I speak of giving
laudanum away, I remember about this time a little incident, which I
mention because, trifling as it was, the reader will soon meet it again
in my dreams, which it influenced more fearfully than could be imagined.
One day a Malay knocked at my door.  What business a Malay could have to
transact amongst English mountains I cannot conjecture; but possibly he
was on his road to a seaport about forty miles distant.

The servant who opened the door to him was a young girl, born and bred
amongst the mountains, who had never seen an Asiatic dress of any sort;
his turban therefore confounded her not a little; and as it turned out
that his attainments in English were exactly of the same extent as hers
in the Malay, there seemed to be an impassable gulf fixed between all
communication of ideas, if either party had happened to possess any.  In
this dilemma, the girl, recollecting the reputed learning of her master
(and doubtless giving me credit for a knowledge of all the languages of
the earth besides perhaps a few of the lunar ones), came and gave me to
understand that there was a sort of demon below, whom she clearly
imagined that my art could exorcise from the house.  I did not
immediately go down, but when I did, the group which presented itself,
arranged as it was by accident, though not very elaborate, took hold of
my fancy and my eye in a way that none of the statuesque attitudes
exhibited in the ballets at the Opera-house, though so ostentatiously
complex, had ever done.  In a cottage kitchen, but panelled on the wall
with dark wood that from age and rubbing resembled oak, and looking more
like a rustic hall of entrance than a kitchen, stood the Malay--his
turban and loose trousers of dingy white relieved upon the dark
panelling.  He had placed himself nearer to the girl than she seemed to
relish, though her native spirit of mountain intrepidity contended with
the feeling of simple awe which her countenance expressed as she gazed
upon the tiger-cat before her.  And a more striking picture there could
not be imagined than the beautiful English face of the girl, and its
exquisite fairness, together with her erect and independent attitude,
contrasted with the sallow and bilious skin of the Malay, enamelled or
veneered with mahogany by marine air, his small, fierce, restless eyes,
thin lips, slavish gestures and adorations.  Half-hidden by the ferocious-
looking Malay was a little child from a neighbouring cottage who had
crept in after him, and was now in the act of reverting its head and
gazing upwards at the turban and the fiery eyes beneath it, whilst with
one hand he caught at the dress of the young woman for protection.  My
knowledge of the Oriental tongues is not remarkably extensive, being
indeed confined to two words--the Arabic word for barley and the Turkish
for opium (madjoon), which I have learned from _Anastasius_; and as I had
neither a Malay dictionary nor even Adelung's _Mithridates_, which might
have helped me to a few words, I addressed him in some lines from the
Iliad, considering that, of such languages as I possessed, Greek, in
point of longitude, came geographically nearest to an Oriental one.  He
worshipped me in a most devout manner, and replied in what I suppose was
Malay.  In this way I saved my reputation with my neighbours, for the
Malay had no means of betraying the secret.  He lay down upon the floor
for about an hour, and then pursued his journey.  On his departure I
presented him with a piece of opium.  To him, as an Orientalist, I
concluded that opium must be familiar; and the expression of his face
convinced me that it was.  Nevertheless, I was struck with some little
consternation when I saw him suddenly raise his hand to his mouth, and,
to use the schoolboy phrase, bolt the whole, divided into three pieces,
at one mouthful.  The quantity was enough to kill three dragoons and
their horses, and I felt some alarm for the poor creature; but what could
be done?  I had given him the opium in compassion for his solitary life,
on recollecting that if he had travelled on foot from London it must be
nearly three weeks since he could have exchanged a thought with any human
being.  I could not think of violating the laws of hospitality by having
him seized and drenched with an emetic, and thus frightening him into a
notion that we were going to sacrifice him to some English idol.  No:
there was clearly no help for it.  He took his leave, and for some days I
felt anxious, but as I never heard of any Malay being found dead, I
became convinced that he was used to opium; and that I must have
done him the service I designed by giving him one night of respite from
the pains of wandering.

This incident I have digressed to mention, because this Malay (partly
from the picturesque exhibition he assisted to frame, partly from the
anxiety I connected with his image for some days) fastened afterwards
upon my dreams, and brought other Malays with him, worse than himself,
that ran "a-muck" at me, and led me into a world of troubles.  But
to quit this episode, and to return to my intercalary year of happiness.
I have said already, that on a subject so important to us all as
happiness, we should listen with pleasure to any man's experience or
experiments, even though he were but a plough-boy, who cannot be supposed
to have ploughed very deep into such an intractable soil as that of human
pains and pleasures, or to have conducted his researches upon any very
enlightened principles.  But I who have taken happiness both in a solid
and liquid shape, both boiled and unboiled, both East India and
Turkey--who have conducted my experiments upon this interesting subject
with a sort of galvanic battery, and have, for the general benefit of the
world, inoculated myself, as it were, with the poison of 8000 drops of
laudanum per day (just for the same reason as a French surgeon inoculated
himself lately with cancer, an English one twenty years ago with plague,
and a third, I know not of what nation, with hydrophobia), I (it will be
admitted) must surely know what happiness is, if anybody does.  And
therefore I will here lay down an analysis of happiness; and as the most
interesting mode of communicating it, I will give it, not didactically,
but wrapped up and involved in a picture of one evening, as I spent every
evening during the intercalary year when laudanum, though taken daily,
was to me no more than the elixir of pleasure.  This done, I shall quit
the subject of happiness altogether, and pass to a very different
one--_the pains of opium_.

Let there be a cottage standing in a valley, eighteen miles from any
town--no spacious valley, but about two miles long by three-quarters of a
mile in average width; the benefit of which provision is that all the
family resident within its circuit will compose, as it were, one larger
household, personally familiar to your eye, and more or less interesting
to your affections.  Let the mountains be real mountains, between 3,000
and 4,000 feet high, and the cottage a real cottage, not (as a witty
author has it) "a cottage with a double coach-house;" let it be, in fact
(for I must abide by the actual scene), a white cottage, embowered with
flowering shrubs, so chosen as to unfold a succession of flowers upon the
walls and clustering round the windows through all the months of spring,
summer, and autumn--beginning, in fact, with May roses, and ending with
jasmine.  Let it, however, _not_ be spring, nor summer, nor autumn, but
winter in his sternest shape.  This is a most important point in the
science of happiness.  And I am surprised to see people overlook it, and
think it matter of congratulation that winter is going, or, if coming, is
not likely to be a severe one.  On the contrary, I put up a petition
annually for as much snow, hail, frost, or storm, of one kind or other,
as the skies can possibly afford us.  Surely everybody is aware of the
divine pleasures which attend a winter fireside, candles at four o'clock,
warm hearth-rugs, tea, a fair tea-maker, shutters closed, curtains
flowing in ample draperies on the floor, whilst the wind and rain are
raging audibly without,

   And at the doors and windows seem to call,
   As heav'n and earth they would together mell;
   Yet the least entrance find they none at all;
   Whence sweeter grows our rest secure in massy hall.

All these are items in the description of a winter evening which must
surely be familiar to everybody born in a high latitude.  And it is
evident that most of these delicacies, like ice-cream, require a very low
temperature of the atmosphere to produce them; they are fruits which
cannot be ripened without weather stormy or inclement in some way or
other.  I am not "_particular_," as people say, whether it be snow, or
black frost, or wind so strong that (as Mr. --- says) "you may lean your
back against it like a post."  I can put up even with rain, provided it
rains cats and dogs; but something of the sort I must have, and if I have
it not, I think myself in a manner ill-used; for why am I called on to
pay so heavily for winter, in coals and candles, and various privations
that will occur even to gentlemen, if I am not to have the article good
of its kind?  No, a Canadian winter for my money, or a Russian one, where
every man is but a co-proprietor with the north wind in the fee-simple of
his own ears.  Indeed, so great an epicure am I in this matter that I
cannot relish a winter night fully if it be much past St. Thomas's day,
and have degenerated into disgusting tendencies to vernal appearances.
No, it must be divided by a thick wall of dark nights from all return of
light and sunshine.  From the latter weeks of October to Christmas Eve,
therefore, is the period during which happiness is in season, which, in
my judgment, enters the room with the tea-tray; for tea, though ridiculed
by those who are naturally of coarse nerves, or are become so from wine-
drinking, and are not susceptible of influence from so refined a
stimulant, will always be the favourite beverage of the intellectual;
and, for my part, I would have joined Dr. Johnson in a _bellum
internecinum_ against Jonas Hanway, or any other impious person, who
should presume to disparage it.  But here, to save myself the trouble of
too much verbal description, I will introduce a painter, and give him
directions for the rest of the picture.  Painters do not like white
cottages, unless a good deal weather-stained; but as the reader now
understands that it is a winter night, his services will not be required
except for the inside of the house.

Paint me, then, a room seventeen feet by twelve, and not more than seven
and a half feet high.  This, reader, is somewhat ambitiously styled in my
family the drawing-room; but being contrived "a double debt to pay," it
is also, and more justly, termed the library, for it happens that books
are the only article of property in which I am richer than my neighbours.
Of these I have about five thousand, collected gradually since my
eighteenth year.  Therefore, painter, put as many as you can into this
room.  Make it populous with books, and, furthermore, paint me a good
fire, and furniture plain and modest, befitting the unpretending cottage
of a scholar.  And near the fire paint me a tea-table, and (as it is
clear that no creature can come to see one such a stormy night) place
only two cups and saucers on the tea-tray; and, if you know how to paint
such a thing symbolically or otherwise, paint me an eternal
tea-pot--eternal _a parte ante_ and _a parte post_--for I usually drink
tea from eight o'clock at night to four o'clock in the morning.  And as
it is very unpleasant to make tea or to pour it out for oneself, paint me
a lovely young woman sitting at the table.  Paint her arms like Aurora's
and her smiles like Hebe's.  But no, dear M., not even in jest let me
insinuate that thy power to illuminate my cottage rests upon a tenure so
perishable as mere personal beauty, or that the witchcraft of angelic
smiles lies within the empire of any earthly pencil.  Pass then, my good
painter, to something more within its power; and the next article brought
forward should naturally be myself--a picture of the Opium-eater, with
his "little golden receptacle of the pernicious drug" lying beside him on
the table.  As to the opium, I have no objection to see a picture of
_that_, though I would rather see the original.  You may paint it if you
choose, but I apprise you that no "little" receptacle would, even in
1816, answer _my_ purpose, who was at a distance from the "stately
Pantheon," and all druggists (mortal or otherwise).  No, you may as well
paint the real receptacle, which was not of gold, but of glass, and as
much like a wine-decanter as possible.  Into this you may put a quart of
ruby-coloured laudanum; that, and a book of German Metaphysics placed by
its side, will sufficiently attest my being in the neighbourhood.  But as
to myself--there I demur.  I admit that, naturally, I ought to occupy the
foreground of the picture; that being the hero of the piece, or (if you
choose) the criminal at the bar, my body should be had into court.  This
seems reasonable; but why should I confess on this point to a painter? or
why confess at all?  If the public (into whose private ear I am
confidentially whispering my confessions, and not into any painter's)
should chance to have framed some agreeable picture for itself of the
Opium-eater's exterior, should have ascribed to him, romantically an
elegant person or a handsome face, why should I barbarously tear from it
so pleasing a delusion--pleasing both to the public and to me?  No; paint
me, if at all, according to your own fancy, and as a painter's fancy
should teem with beautiful creations, I cannot fail in that way to be a
gainer.  And now, reader, we have run through all the ten categories of
my condition as it stood about 1816-17, up to the middle of which latter
year I judge myself to have been a happy man, and the elements of that
happiness I have endeavoured to place before you in the above sketch of
the interior of a scholar's library, in a cottage among the mountains, on
a stormy winter evening.

But now, farewell--a long farewell--to happiness, winter or summer!
Farewell to smiles and laughter!  Farewell to peace of mind!  Farewell to
hope and to tranquil dreams, and to the blessed consolations of sleep.
For more than three years and a half I am summoned away from these.  I am
now arrived at an Iliad of woes, for I have now to record



   As when some great painter dips
   His pencil in the gloom of earthquake and eclipse.

Reader, who have thus far accompanied me, I must request your attention
to a brief explanatory note on three points:

1.  For several reasons I have not been able to compose the notes for
this part of my narrative into any regular and connected shape.  I give
the notes disjointed as I find them, or have now drawn them up from
memory.  Some of them point to their own date, some I have dated, and
some are undated.  Whenever it could answer my purpose to transplant them
from the natural or chronological order, I have not scrupled to do so.
Sometimes I speak in the present, sometimes in the past tense.  Few of
the notes, perhaps, were written exactly at the period of time to which
they relate; but this can little affect their accuracy, as the
impressions were such that they can never fade from my mind.  Much has
been omitted.  I could not, without effort, constrain myself to the task
of either recalling, or constructing into a regular narrative, the whole
burthen of horrors which lies upon my brain.  This feeling partly I plead
in excuse, and partly that I am now in London, and am a helpless sort of
person, who cannot even arrange his own papers without assistance; and I
am separated from the hands which are wont to perform for me the offices
of an amanuensis.

2.  You will think perhaps that I am too confidential and communicative
of my own private history.  It may be so.  But my way of writing is
rather to think aloud, and follow my own humours, than much to consider
who is listening to me; and if I stop to consider what is proper to be
said to this or that person, I shall soon come to doubt whether any part
at all is proper.  The fact is, I place myself at a distance of fifteen
or twenty years ahead of this time, and suppose myself writing to those
who will be interested about me hereafter; and wishing to have some
record of time, the entire history of which no one can know but myself, I
do it as fully as I am able with the efforts I am now capable of making,
because I know not whether I can ever find time to do it again.

3.  It will occur to you often to ask, why did I not release myself from
the horrors of opium by leaving it off or diminishing it?  To this I must
answer briefly: it might be supposed that I yielded to the fascinations
of opium too easily; it cannot be supposed that any man can be charmed by
its terrors.  The reader may be sure, therefore, that I made attempts
innumerable to reduce the quantity.  I add, that those who witnessed the
agonies of those attempts, and not myself, were the first to beg me to
desist.  But could not have I reduced it a drop a day, or, by adding
water, have bisected or trisected a drop?  A thousand drops bisected
would thus have taken nearly six years to reduce, and that way would
certainly not have answered.  But this is a common mistake of those who
know nothing of opium experimentally; I appeal to those who do, whether
it is not always found that down to a certain point it can be reduced
with ease and even pleasure, but that after that point further reduction
causes intense suffering.  Yes, say many thoughtless persons, who know
not what they are talking of, you will suffer a little low spirits and
dejection for a few days.  I answer, no; there is nothing like low
spirits; on the contrary, the mere animal spirits are uncommonly raised:
the pulse is improved: the health is better.  It is not there that the
suffering lies.  It has no resemblance to the sufferings caused by
renouncing wine.  It is a state of unutterable irritation of stomach
(which surely is not much like dejection), accompanied by intense
perspirations, and feelings such as I shall not attempt to describe
without more space at my command.

I shall now enter _in medias res_, and shall anticipate, from a time when
my opium pains might be said to be at their _acme_, an account of their
palsying effects on the intellectual faculties.

My studies have now been long interrupted.  I cannot read to myself with
any pleasure, hardly with a moment's endurance.  Yet I read aloud
sometimes for the pleasure of others, because reading is an
accomplishment of mine, and, in the slang use of the word
"accomplishment" as a superficial and ornamental attainment, almost the
only one I possess; and formerly, if I had any vanity at all connected
with any endowment or attainment of mine, it was with this, for I had
observed that no accomplishment was so rare.  Players are the worst
readers of all:--reads vilely; and Mrs. ---, who is so celebrated, can
read nothing well but dramatic compositions: Milton she cannot read
sufferably.  People in general either read poetry without any passion at
all, or else overstep the modesty of nature, and read not like scholars.
Of late, if I have felt moved by anything it has been by the grand
lamentations of Samson Agonistes, or the great harmonies of the Satanic
speeches in Paradise Regained, when read aloud by myself.  A young lady
sometimes comes and drinks tea with us: at her request and M.'s, I now
and then read W-'s poems to them.  (W., by-the-bye is the only poet I
ever met who could read his own verses: often indeed he reads admirably.)

For nearly two years I believe that I read no book, but one; and I owe it
to the author, in discharge of a great debt of gratitude, to mention what
that was.  The sublimer and more passionate poets I still read, as I have
said, by snatches, and occasionally.  But my proper vocation, as I well
know, was the exercise of the analytic understanding.  Now, for the most
part analytic studies are continuous, and not to be pursued by fits and
starts, or fragmentary efforts.  Mathematics, for instance, intellectual
philosophy, &c, were all become insupportable to me; I shrunk from them
with a sense of powerless and infantine feebleness that gave me an
anguish the greater from remembering the time when I grappled with them
to my own hourly delight; and for this further reason, because I had
devoted the labour of my whole life, and had dedicated my intellect,
blossoms and fruits, to the slow and elaborate toil of constructing one
single work, to which I had presumed to give the title of an unfinished
work of Spinosa's--viz., _De Emendatione Humani Intellectus_.  This was
now lying locked up, as by frost, like any Spanish bridge or aqueduct,
begun upon too great a scale for the resources of the architect; and
instead of reviving me as a monument of wishes at least, and aspirations,
and a life of labour dedicated to the exaltation of human nature in that
way in which God had best fitted me to promote so great an object, it was
likely to stand a memorial to my children of hopes defeated, of baffled
efforts, of materials uselessly accumulated, of foundations laid that
were never to support a super-structure--of the grief and the ruin of the
architect.  In this state of imbecility I had, for amusement, turned my
attention to political economy; my understanding, which formerly had been
as active and restless as a hyaena, could not, I suppose (so long as I
lived at all) sink into utter lethargy; and political economy offers this
advantage to a person in my state, that though it is eminently an organic
science (no part, that is to say, but what acts on the whole as the whole
again reacts on each part), yet the several parts may be detached and
contemplated singly.  Great as was the prostration of my powers at this
time, yet I could not forget my knowledge; and my understanding had been
for too many years intimate with severe thinkers, with logic, and the
great masters of knowledge, not to be aware of the utter feebleness of
the main herd of modern economists.  I had been led in 1811 to look into
loads of books and pamphlets on many branches of economy; and, at my
desire, M. sometimes read to me chapters from more recent works, or parts
of parliamentary debates.  I saw that these were generally the very dregs
and rinsings of the human intellect; and that any man of sound head, and
practised in wielding logic with a scholastic adroitness, might take up
the whole academy of modern economists, and throttle them between heaven
and earth with his finger and thumb, or bray their fungus-heads to powder
with a lady's fan.  At length, in 1819, a friend in Edinburgh sent me
down Mr. Ricardo's book; and recurring to my own prophetic anticipation
of the advent of some legislator for this science, I said, before I had
finished the first chapter, "Thou art the man!"  Wonder and curiosity
were emotions that had long been dead in me.  Yet I wondered once more: I
wondered at myself that I could once again be stimulated to the effort of
reading, and much more I wondered at the book.  Had this profound work
been really written in England during the nineteenth century?  Was it
possible?  I supposed thinking had been extinct in England.  Could
it be that an Englishman, and he not in academic bowers, but oppressed by
mercantile and senatorial cares, had accomplished what all the
universities of Europe and a century of thought had failed even to
advance by one hair's breadth?  All other writers had been crushed and
overlaid by the enormous weight of facts and documents.  Mr. Ricardo had
deduced _a priori_ from the understanding itself laws which first gave a
ray of light into the unwieldy chaos of materials, and had constructed
what had been but a collection of tentative discussions into a science of
regular proportions, now first standing on an eternal basis.

Thus did one single work of a profound understanding avail to give me a
pleasure and an activity which I had not known for years.  It roused me
even to write, or at least to dictate what M. wrote for me.  It seemed to
me that some important truths had escaped even "the inevitable eye" of
Mr. Ricardo; and as these were for the most part of such a nature that I
could express or illustrate them more briefly and elegantly by algebraic
symbols than in the usual clumsy and loitering diction of economists, the
whole would not have filled a pocket-book; and being so brief, with M.
for my amanuensis, even at this time, incapable as I was of all general
exertion, I drew up my _Prolegomena to all future Systems of Political
Economy_.  I hope it will not be found redolent of opium; though, indeed,
to most people the subject is a sufficient opiate.

This exertion, however, was but a temporary flash, as the sequel showed;
for I designed to publish my work.  Arrangements were made at a
provincial press, about eighteen miles distant, for printing it.  An
additional compositor was retained for some days on this account.  The
work was even twice advertised, and I was in a manner pledged to the
fulfilment of my intention.  But I had a preface to write, and a
dedication, which I wished to make a splendid one, to Mr. Ricardo.  I
found myself quite unable to accomplish all this.  The arrangements were
countermanded, the compositor dismissed, and my "Prolegomena" rested
peacefully by the side of its elder and more dignified brother.

I have thus described and illustrated my intellectual torpor in terms
that apply more or less to every part of the four years during which I
was under the Circean spells of opium.  But for misery and suffering, I
might indeed be said to have existed in a dormant state.  I seldom could
prevail on myself to write a letter; an answer of a few words to any that
I received was the utmost that I could accomplish, and often _that_ not
until the letter had lain weeks or even months on my writing-table.
Without the aid of M. all records of bills paid or _to be_ paid must have
perished, and my whole domestic economy, whatever became of Political
Economy, must have gone into irretrievable confusion.  I shall not
afterwards allude to this part of the case.  It is one, however, which
the opium-eater will find, in the end, as oppressive and tormenting as
any other, from the sense of incapacity and feebleness, from the direct
embarrassments incident to the neglect or procrastination of each day's
appropriate duties, and from the remorse which must often exasperate the
stings of these evils to a reflective and conscientious mind.  The opium-
eater loses none of his moral sensibilities or aspirations.  He wishes
and longs as earnestly as ever to realize what he believes possible, and
feels to be exacted by duty; but his intellectual apprehension of what is
possible infinitely outruns his power, not of execution only, but even of
power to attempt.  He lies under the weight of incubus and nightmare; he
lies in sight of all that he would fain perform, just as a man forcibly
confined to his bed by the mortal languor of a relaxing disease, who is
compelled to witness injury or outrage offered to some object of his
tenderest love: he curses the spells which chain him down from motion; he
would lay down his life if he might but get up and walk; but he is
powerless as an infant, and cannot even attempt to rise.

I now pass to what is the main subject of these latter confessions, to
the history and journal of what took place in my dreams, for these were
the immediate and proximate cause of my acutest suffering.

The first notice I had of any important change going on in this part of
my physical economy was from the reawakening of a state of eye generally
incident to childhood, or exalted states of irritability.  I know not
whether my reader is aware that many children, perhaps most, have a power
of painting, as it were upon the darkness, all sorts of phantoms.  In
some that power is simply a mechanical affection of the eye; others have
a voluntary or semi-voluntary power to dismiss or to summon them; or, as
a child once said to me when I questioned him on this matter, "I can tell
them to go, and they go ---, but sometimes they come when I don't tell
them to come."  Whereupon I told him that he had almost as unlimited a
command over apparitions as a Roman centurion over his soldiers.--In the
middle of 1817, I think it was, that this faculty became positively
distressing to me: at night, when I lay awake in bed, vast processions
passed along in mournful pomp; friezes of never-ending stories, that to
my feelings were as sad and solemn as if they were stories drawn from
times before OEdipus or Priam, before Tyre, before Memphis.  And at the
same time a corresponding change took place in my dreams; a theatre
seemed suddenly opened and lighted up within my brain, which presented
nightly spectacles of more than earthly splendour.  And the four
following facts may be mentioned as noticeable at this time:

1.  That as the creative state of the eye increased, a sympathy seemed to
arise between the waking and the dreaming states of the brain in one
point--that whatsoever I happened to call up and to trace by a voluntary
act upon the darkness was very apt to transfer itself to my dreams, so
that I feared to exercise this faculty; for, as Midas turned all things
to gold that yet baffled his hopes and defrauded his human desires, so
whatsoever things capable of being visually represented I did but think
of in the darkness, immediately shaped themselves into phantoms of the
eye; and by a process apparently no less inevitable, when thus once
traced in faint and visionary colours, like writings in sympathetic ink,
they were drawn out by the fierce chemistry of my dreams into
insufferable splendour that fretted my heart.

2.  For this and all other changes in my dreams were accompanied by deep-
seated anxiety and gloomy melancholy, such as are wholly incommunicable
by words.  I seemed every night to descend, not metaphorically, but
literally to descend, into chasms and sunless abysses, depths below
depths, from which it seemed hopeless that I could ever reascend.  Nor
did I, by waking, feel that I _had_ reascended.  This I do not dwell
upon; because the state of gloom which attended these gorgeous
spectacles, amounting at last to utter darkness, as of some suicidal
despondency, cannot be approached by words.

3.  The sense of space, and in the end the sense of time, were both
powerfully affected.  Buildings, landscapes, &c., were exhibited in
proportions so vast as the bodily eye is not fitted to receive.  Space
swelled, and was amplified to an extent of unutterable infinity.  This,
however, did not disturb me so much as the vast expansion of time; I
sometimes seemed to have lived for 70 or 100 years in one night--nay,
sometimes had feelings representative of a millennium passed in that
time, or, however, of a duration far beyond the limits of any human
experience.

4.  The minutest incidents of childhood, or forgotten scenes of later
years, were often revived: I could not be said to recollect them, for if
I had been told of them when waking, I should not have been able to
acknowledge them as parts of my past experience.  But placed as they were
before me, in dreams like intuitions, and clothed in all their evanescent
circumstances and accompanying feelings, I _recognised_ them
instantaneously.  I was once told by a near relative of mine, that having
in her childhood fallen into a river, and being on the very verge of
death but for the critical assistance which reached her, she saw in a
moment her whole life, in its minutest incidents, arrayed before her
simultaneously as in a mirror; and she had a faculty developed as
suddenly for comprehending the whole and every part.  This, from some
opium experiences of mine, I can believe; I have indeed seen the same
thing asserted twice in modern books, and accompanied by a remark which I
am convinced is true; viz., that the dread book of account which the
Scriptures speak of is in fact the mind itself of each individual.  Of
this at least I feel assured, that there is no such thing as _forgetting_
possible to the mind; a thousand accidents may and will interpose a veil
between our present consciousness and the secret inscriptions on the
mind; accidents of the same sort will also rend away this veil; but
alike, whether veiled or unveiled, the inscription remains for ever, just
as the stars seem to withdraw before the common light of day, whereas in
fact we all know that it is the light which is drawn over them as a veil,
and that they are waiting to be revealed when the obscuring daylight
shall have withdrawn.

Having noticed these four facts as memorably distinguishing my dreams
from those of health, I shall now cite a case illustrative of the first
fact, and shall then cite any others that I remember, either in their
chronological order, or any other that may give them more effect as
pictures to the reader.

I had been in youth, and even since, for occasional amusement, a great
reader of Livy, whom I confess that I prefer, both for style and matter,
to any other of the Roman historians; and I had often felt as most solemn
and appalling sounds, and most emphatically representative of the majesty
of the Roman people, the two words so often occurring in Livy--_Consul
Romanus_, especially when the consul is introduced in his military
character.  I mean to say that the words king, sultan, regent, &c., or
any other titles of those who embody in their own persons the collective
majesty of a great people, had less power over my reverential feelings.  I
had also, though no great reader of history, made myself minutely and
critically familiar with one period of English history, viz., the period
of the Parliamentary War, having been attracted by the moral grandeur of
some who figured in that day, and by the many interesting memoirs which
survive those unquiet times.  Both these parts of my lighter reading,
having furnished me often with matter of reflection, now furnished me
with matter for my dreams.  Often I used to see, after painting upon the
blank darkness a sort of rehearsal whilst waking, a crowd of ladies, and
perhaps a festival and dances.  And I heard it said, or I said to myself,
"These are English ladies from the unhappy times of Charles I.  These are
the wives and the daughters of those who met in peace, and sate at the
same table, and were allied by marriage or by blood; and yet, after a
certain day in August 1642, never smiled upon each other again, nor met
but in the field of battle; and at Marston Moor, at Newbury, or at
Naseby, cut asunder all ties of love by the cruel sabre, and washed away
in blood the memory of ancient friendship."  The ladies danced, and
looked as lovely as the court of George IV.  Yet I knew, even in my
dream, that they had been in the grave for nearly two centuries.  This
pageant would suddenly dissolve; and at a clapping of hands would be
heard the heart-quaking sound _of Consul Romanus_; and immediately came
"sweeping by," in gorgeous paludaments, Paulus or Marius, girt round by a
company of centurions, with the crimson tunic hoisted on a spear, and
followed by the _alalagmos_ of the Roman legions.

Many years ago, when I was looking over Piranesi's, Antiquities of Rome,
Mr. Coleridge, who was standing by, described to me a set of plates by
that artist, called his _Dreams_, and which record the scenery of his own
visions during the delirium of a fever.  Some of them (I describe only
from memory of Mr. Coleridge's account) represented vast Gothic halls, on
the floor of which stood all sorts of engines and machinery, wheels,
cables, pulleys, levers, catapults, &c. &c., expressive of enormous power
put forth and resistance overcome.  Creeping along the sides of the walls
you perceived a staircase; and upon it, groping his way upwards, was
Piranesi himself: follow the stairs a little further and you perceive it
come to a sudden and abrupt termination without any balustrade, and
allowing no step onwards to him who had reached the extremity except into
the depths below.  Whatever is to become of poor Piranesi, you suppose at
least that his labours must in some way terminate here.  But raise your
eyes, and behold a second flight of stairs still higher, on which again
Piranesi is perceived, but this time standing on the very brink of the
abyss.  Again elevate your eye, and a still more aerial flight of stairs
is beheld, and again is poor Piranesi busy on his aspiring labours; and
so on, until the unfinished stairs and Piranesi both are lost in the
upper gloom of the hall.  With the same power of endless growth and self-
reproduction did my architecture proceed in dreams.  In the early stage
of my malady the splendours of my dreams were indeed chiefly
architectural; and I beheld such pomp of cities and palaces as was never
yet beheld by the waking eye unless in the clouds.  From a great modern
poet I cite part of a passage which describes, as an appearance actually
beheld in the clouds, what in many of its circumstances I saw frequently
in sleep:

   The appearance, instantaneously disclosed,
   Was of a mighty city--boldly say
   A wilderness of building, sinking far
   And self-withdrawn into a wondrous depth,
   Far sinking into splendour--without end!
   Fabric it seem'd of diamond, and of gold,
   With alabaster domes, and silver spires,
   And blazing terrace upon terrace, high
   Uplifted; here, serene pavilions bright
   In avenues disposed; there towers begirt
   With battlements that on their restless fronts
   Bore stars--illumination of all gems!
   By earthly nature had the effect been wrought
   Upon the dark materials of the storm
   Now pacified; on them, and on the coves,
   And mountain-steeps and summits, whereunto
   The vapours had receded,--taking there
   Their station under a cerulean sky.  &c. &c.

The sublime circumstance, "battlements that on their _restless_ fronts
bore stars," might have been copied from my architectural dreams, for it
often occurred.  We hear it reported of Dryden and of Fuseli, in modern
times, that they thought proper to eat raw meat for the sake of obtaining
splendid dreams: how much better for such a purpose to have eaten opium,
which yet I do not remember that any poet is recorded to have done,
except the dramatist Shadwell; and in ancient days Homer is I think
rightly reputed to have known the virtues of opium.

To my architecture succeeded dreams of lakes and silvery expanses of
water: these haunted me so much that I feared (though possibly it will
appear ludicrous to a medical man) that some dropsical state or tendency
of the brain might thus be making itself (to use a metaphysical word)
_objective_; and the sentient organ _project_ itself as its own object.
For two months I suffered greatly in my head, a part of my bodily
structure which had hitherto been so clear from all touch or taint of
weakness (physically I mean) that I used to say of it, as the last Lord
Orford said of his stomach, that it seemed likely to survive the rest of
my person.  Till now I had never felt a headache even, or any the
slightest pain, except rheumatic pains caused by my own folly.  However,
I got over this attack, though it must have been verging on something
very dangerous.

The waters now changed their character--from translucent lakes shining
like mirrors they now became seas and oceans.  And now came a tremendous
change, which, unfolding itself slowly like a scroll through many months,
promised an abiding torment; and in fact it never left me until the
winding up of my case.  Hitherto the human face had mixed often in my
dreams, but not despotically nor with any special power of tormenting.
But now that which I have called the tyranny of the human face began to
unfold itself.  Perhaps some part of my London life might be answerable
for this.  Be that as it may, now it was that upon the rocking waters of
the ocean the human face began to appear; the sea appeared paved with
innumerable faces upturned to the heavens--faces imploring, wrathful,
despairing, surged upwards by thousands, by myriads, by generations, by
centuries: my agitation was infinite; my mind tossed and surged with the
ocean.

The Malay has been a fearful enemy for months.  I have been every night,
through his means, transported into Asiatic scenes.  I know not whether
others share in my feelings on this point; but I have often thought that
if I were compelled to forego England, and to live in China, and among
Chinese manners and modes of life and scenery, I should go mad.  The
causes of my horror lie deep, and some of them must be common to others.
Southern Asia in general is the seat of awful images and associations.  As
the cradle of the human race, it would alone have a dim and reverential
feeling connected with it.  But there are other reasons.  No man can
pretend that the wild, barbarous, and capricious superstitions of Africa,
or of savage tribes elsewhere, affect him in the way that he is affected
by the ancient, monumental, cruel, and elaborate religions of Indostan,
&c.  The mere antiquity of Asiatic things, of their institutions,
histories, modes of faith, &c., is so impressive, that to me the vast age
of the race and name overpowers the sense of youth in the individual.  A
young Chinese seems to me an antediluvian man renewed.  Even Englishmen,
though not bred in any knowledge of such institutions, cannot but shudder
at the mystic sublimity of _castes_ that have flowed apart, and refused
to mix, through such immemorial tracts of time; nor can any man fail to
be awed by the names of the Ganges or the Euphrates.  It contributes much
to these feelings that southern Asia is, and has been for thousands of
years, the part of the earth most swarming with human life, the great
_officina gentium_.  Man is a weed in those regions.  The vast empires
also in which the enormous population of Asia has always been cast, give
a further sublimity to the feelings associated with all Oriental names or
images.  In China, over and above what it has in common with the rest of
southern Asia, I am terrified by the modes of life, by the manners, and
the barrier of utter abhorrence and want of sympathy placed between us by
feelings deeper than I can analyse.  I could sooner live with lunatics or
brute animals.  All this, and much more than I can say or have time to
say, the reader must enter into before he can comprehend the unimaginable
horror which these dreams of Oriental imagery and mythological tortures
impressed upon me.  Under the connecting feeling of tropical heat and
vertical sunlights I brought together all creatures, birds, beasts,
reptiles, all trees and plants, usages and appearances, that are found in
all tropical regions, and assembled them together in China or Indostan.
From kindred feelings, I soon brought Egypt and all her gods under the
same law.  I was stared at, hooted at, grinned at, chattered at, by
monkeys, by parroquets, by cockatoos.  I ran into pagodas, and was fixed
for centuries at the summit or in secret rooms: I was the idol; I was the
priest; I was worshipped; I was sacrificed.  I fled from the wrath of
Brama through all the forests of Asia: Vishnu hated me: Seeva laid wait
for me.  I came suddenly upon Isis and Osiris: I had done a deed, they
said, which the ibis and the crocodile trembled at.  I was buried for a
thousand years in stone coffins, with mummies and sphynxes, in narrow
chambers at the heart of eternal pyramids.  I was kissed, with cancerous
kisses, by crocodiles; and laid, confounded with all unutterable slimy
things, amongst reeds and Nilotic mud.

I thus give the reader some slight abstraction of my Oriental dreams,
which always filled me with such amazement at the monstrous scenery that
horror seemed absorbed for a while in sheer astonishment.  Sooner or
later came a reflux of feeling that swallowed up the astonishment, and
left me not so much in terror as in hatred and abomination of what I saw.
Over every form, and threat, and punishment, and dim sightless
incarceration, brooded a sense of eternity and infinity that drove me
into an oppression as of madness.  Into these dreams only it was, with
one or two slight exceptions, that any circumstances of physical horror
entered.  All before had been moral and spiritual terrors.  But here the
main agents were ugly birds, or snakes, or crocodiles; especially the
last.  The cursed crocodile became to me the object of more horror than
almost all the rest.  I was compelled to live with him, and (as was
always the case almost in my dreams) for centuries.  I escaped sometimes,
and found myself in Chinese houses, with cane tables, &c.  All the feet
of the tables, sofas, &c., soon became instinct with life: the abominable
head of the crocodile, and his leering eyes, looked out at me, multiplied
into a thousand repetitions; and I stood loathing and fascinated.  And so
often did this hideous reptile haunt my dreams that many times the very
same dream was broken up in the very same way: I heard gentle voices
speaking to me (I hear everything when I am sleeping), and instantly I
awoke.  It was broad noon, and my children were standing, hand in hand,
at my bedside--come to show me their coloured shoes, or new frocks, or to
let me see them dressed for going out.  I protest that so awful was the
transition from the damned crocodile, and the other unutterable monsters
and abortions of my dreams, to the sight of innocent _human_ natures and
of infancy, that in the mighty and sudden revulsion of mind I wept, and
could not forbear it, as I kissed their faces.


I have had occasion to remark, at various periods of my life, that the
deaths of those whom we love, and indeed the contemplation of death
generally, is (_caeteris paribus_) more affecting in summer than in any
other season of the year.  And the reasons are these three, I think:
first, that the visible heavens in summer appear far higher, more
distant, and (if such a solecism may be excused) more infinite; the
clouds, by which chiefly the eye expounds the distance of the blue
pavilion stretched over our heads, are in summer more voluminous, massed
and accumulated in far grander and more towering piles.  Secondly, the
light and the appearances of the declining and the setting sun are much
more fitted to be types and characters of the Infinite.  And thirdly
(which is the main reason), the exuberant and riotous prodigality of life
naturally forces the mind more powerfully upon the antagonist thought of
death, and the wintry sterility of the grave.  For it may be observed
generally, that wherever two thoughts stand related to each other by a
law of antagonism, and exist, as it were, by mutual repulsion, they are
apt to suggest each other.  On these accounts it is that I find it
impossible to banish the thought of death when I am walking alone in the
endless days of summer; and any particular death, if not more affecting,
at least haunts my mind more obstinately and besiegingly in that season.
Perhaps this cause, and a slight incident which I omit, might have been
the immediate occasions of the following dream, to which, however, a
predisposition must always have existed in my mind; but having been once
roused it never left me, and split into a thousand fantastic varieties,
which often suddenly reunited, and composed again the original dream.

I thought that it was a Sunday morning in May, that it was Easter Sunday,
and as yet very early in the morning.  I was standing, as it seemed to
me, at the door of my own cottage.  Right before me lay the very scene
which could really be commanded from that situation, but exalted, as was
usual, and solemnised by the power of dreams.  There were the same
mountains, and the same lovely valley at their feet; but the mountains
were raised to more than Alpine height, and there was interspace far
larger between them of meadows and forest lawns; the hedges were rich
with white roses; and no living creature was to be seen, excepting that
in the green churchyard there were cattle tranquilly reposing upon the
verdant graves, and particularly round about the grave of a child whom I
had tenderly loved, just as I had really beheld them, a little before
sunrise in the same summer, when that child died.  I gazed upon the well-
known scene, and I said aloud (as I thought) to myself, "It yet wants
much of sunrise, and it is Easter Sunday; and that is the day on which
they celebrate the first fruits of resurrection.  I will walk abroad; old
griefs shall be forgotten to-day; for the air is cool and still, and the
hills are high and stretch away to heaven; and the forest glades are as
quiet as the churchyard, and with the dew I can wash the fever from my
forehead, and then I shall be unhappy no longer."  And I turned as if to
open my garden gate, and immediately I saw upon the left a scene far
different, but which yet the power of dreams had reconciled into harmony
with the other.  The scene was an Oriental one, and there also it was
Easter Sunday, and very early in the morning.  And at a vast distance
were visible, as a stain upon the horizon, the domes and cupolas of a
great city--an image or faint abstraction, caught perhaps in childhood
from some picture of Jerusalem.  And not a bow-shot from me, upon a stone
and shaded by Judean palms, there sat a woman, and I looked, and it
was--Ann!  She fixed her eyes upon me earnestly, and I said to her at
length: "So, then, I have found you at last."  I waited, but she answered
me not a word.  Her face was the same as when I saw it last, and yet
again how different!  Seventeen years ago, when the lamplight fell upon
her face, as for the last time I kissed her lips (lips, Ann, that to me
were not polluted), her eyes were streaming with tears: the tears were
now wiped away; she seemed more beautiful than she was at that time, but
in all other points the same, and not older.  Her looks were tranquil,
but with unusual solemnity of expression, and I now gazed upon her with
some awe; but suddenly her countenance grew dim, and turning to the
mountains I perceived vapours rolling between us.  In a moment all had
vanished, thick darkness came on, and in the twinkling of an eye I was
far away from mountains, and by lamplight in Oxford Street, walking again
with Ann--just as we walked seventeen years before, when we were both
children.

As a final specimen, I cite one of a different character, from 1820.

The dream commenced with a music which now I often heard in dreams--a
music of preparation and of awakening suspense, a music like the opening
of the Coronation Anthem, and which, like _that_, gave the feeling of a
vast march, of infinite cavalcades filing off, and the tread of
innumerable armies.  The morning was come of a mighty day--a day of
crisis and of final hope for human nature, then suffering some mysterious
eclipse, and labouring in some dread extremity.  Somewhere, I knew not
where--somehow, I knew not how--by some beings, I knew not whom--a
battle, a strife, an agony, was conducting, was evolving like a great
drama or piece of music, with which my sympathy was the more
insupportable from my confusion as to its place, its cause, its nature,
and its possible issue.  I, as is usual in dreams (where of necessity we
make ourselves central to every movement), had the power, and yet had not
the power, to decide it.  I had the power, if I could raise myself to
will it, and yet again had not the power, for the weight of twenty
Atlantics was upon me, or the oppression of inexpiable guilt.  "Deeper
than ever plummet sounded," I lay inactive.  Then like a chorus the
passion deepened.  Some greater interest was at stake, some mightier
cause than ever yet the sword had pleaded, or trumpet had proclaimed.
Then came sudden alarms, hurryings to and fro, trepidations of
innumerable fugitives--I knew not whether from the good cause or the bad,
darkness and lights, tempest and human faces, and at last, with the sense
that all was lost, female forms, and the features that were worth all the
world to me, and but a moment allowed--and clasped hands, and
heart-breaking partings, and then--everlasting farewells!  And with a
sigh, such as the caves of Hell sighed when the incestuous mother uttered
the abhorred name of death, the sound was reverberated--everlasting
farewells!  And again and yet again reverberated--everlasting farewells!

And I awoke in struggles, and cried aloud--"I will sleep no more."

But I am now called upon to wind up a narrative which has already
extended to an unreasonable length.  Within more spacious limits the
materials which I have used might have been better unfolded, and much
which I have not used might have been added with effect.  Perhaps,
however, enough has been given.  It now remains that I should say
something of the way in which this conflict of horrors was finally
brought to a crisis.  The reader is already aware (from a passage near
the beginning of the introduction to the first part) that the Opium-eater
has, in some way or other, "unwound almost to its final links the
accursed chain which bound him."  By what means?  To have narrated this
according to the original intention would have far exceeded the space
which can now be allowed.  It is fortunate, as such a cogent reason
exists for abridging it, that I should, on a maturer view of the case,
have been exceedingly unwilling to injure, by any such unaffecting
details, the impression of the history itself, as an appeal to the
prudence and the conscience of the yet unconfirmed opium-eater--or even
(though a very inferior consideration) to injure its effect as a
composition.  The interest of the judicious reader will not attach itself
chiefly to the subject of the fascinating spells, but to the fascinating
power.  Not the Opium-eater, but the opium, is the true hero of the tale,
and the legitimate centre on which the interest revolves.  The object was
to display the marvellous agency of opium, whether for pleasure or for
pain: if that is done, the action of the piece has closed.

However, as some people, in spite of all laws to the contrary, will
persist in asking what became of the Opium-eater, and in what state he
now is, I answer for him thus: The reader is aware that opium had long
ceased to found its empire on spells of pleasure; it was solely by the
tortures connected with the attempt to abjure it that it kept its hold.
Yet, as other tortures, no less it may be thought, attended the
non-abjuration of such a tyrant, a choice only of evils was left; and
_that_ might as well have been adopted which, however terrific in itself,
held out a prospect of final restoration to happiness.  This appears
true; but good logic gave the author no strength to act upon it.  However,
a crisis arrived for the author's life, and a crisis for other objects
still dearer to him--and which will always be far dearer to him than his
life, even now that it is again a happy one.  I saw that I must die if I
continued the opium.  I determined, therefore, if that should be
required, to die in throwing it off.  How much I was at that time taking
I cannot say, for the opium which I used had been purchased for me by a
friend, who afterwards refused to let me pay him; so that I could not
ascertain even what quantity I had used within the year.  I apprehend,
however, that I took it very irregularly, and that I varied from about
fifty or sixty grains to 150 a day.  My first task was to reduce it to
forty, to thirty, and as fast as I could to twelve grains.

I triumphed.  But think not, reader, that therefore my sufferings were
ended, nor think of me as of one sitting in a _dejected_ state.  Think of
me as one, even when four months had passed, still agitated, writhing,
throbbing, palpitating, shattered, and much perhaps in the situation of
him who has been racked, as I collect the torments of that state from the
affecting account of them left by a most innocent sufferer of the
times of James I.  Meantime, I derived no benefit from any medicine,
except one prescribed to me by an Edinburgh surgeon of great eminence,
viz., ammoniated tincture of valerian.  Medical account, therefore, of my
emancipation I have not much to give, and even that little, as managed by
a man so ignorant of medicine as myself, would probably tend only to
mislead.  At all events, it would be misplaced in this situation.  The
moral of the narrative is addressed to the opium-eater, and therefore of
necessity limited in its application.  If he is taught to fear and
tremble, enough has been effected.  But he may say that the issue of my
case is at least a proof that opium, after a seventeen years' use and an
eight years' abuse of its powers, may still be renounced, and that _he_
may chance to bring to the task greater energy than I did, or that with a
stronger constitution than mine he may obtain the same results with less.
This may be true.  I would not presume to measure the efforts of other
men by my own.  I heartily wish him more energy.  I wish him the same
success.  Nevertheless, I had motives external to myself which he may
unfortunately want, and these supplied me with conscientious supports
which mere personal interests might fail to supply to a mind debilitated
by opium.

Jeremy Taylor conjectures that it may be as painful to be born as to die.
I think it probable; and during the whole period of diminishing the opium
I had the torments of a man passing out of one mode of existence into
another.  The issue was not death, but a sort of physical regeneration;
and I may add that ever since, at intervals, I have had a restoration of
more than youthful spirits, though under the pressure of difficulties
which in a less happy state of mind I should have called misfortunes.

One memorial of my former condition still remains--my dreams are not yet
perfectly calm; the dread swell and agitation of the storm have not
wholly subsided; the legions that encamped in them are drawing off, but
not all departed; my sleep is still tumultuous, and, like the gates of
Paradise to our first parents when looking back from afar, it is still
(in the tremendous line of Milton)

The interest excited by the two papers bearing this title, in our numbers
for September and October 1821, will have kept our promise of a Third
Part fresh in the remembrance of our readers.  That we are still unable
to fulfil our engagement in its original meaning will, we, are sure, be
matter of regret to them as to ourselves, especially when they have
perused the following affecting narrative.  It was composed for the
purpose of being appended to an edition of the Confessions in a separate
volume, which is already before the public, and we have reprinted it
entire, that our subscribers may be in possession of the whole of this
extraordinary history.

The proprietors of this little work having determined on reprinting it,
some explanation seems called for, to account for the non-appearance of a
third part promised in the _London Magazine_ of December last; and the
more so because the proprietors, under whose guarantee that promise was
issued, might otherwise be implicated in the blame--little or
much--attached to its non-fulfilment.  This blame, in mere justice, the
author takes wholly upon himself.  What may be the exact amount of the
guilt which he thus appropriates is a very dark question to his own
judgment, and not much illuminated by any of the masters in casuistry
whom he has consulted on the occasion.  On the one hand it seems
generally agreed that a promise is binding in the inverse ratio of the
numbers to whom it is made; for which reason it is that we see many
persons break promises without scruple that are made to a whole nation,
who keep their faith religiously in all private engagements, breaches of
promise towards the stronger party being committed at a man's own peril;
on the other hand, the only parties interested in the promises of an
author are his readers, and these it is a point of modesty in any author
to believe as few as possible--or perhaps only one, in which case any
promise imposes a sanctity of moral obligation which it is shocking to
think of.  Casuistry dismissed, however, the author throws himself on the
indulgent consideration of all who may conceive themselves aggrieved by
his delay, in the following account of his own condition from the end of
last year, when the engagement was made, up nearly to the present time.
For any purpose of self-excuse it might be sufficient to say that
intolerable bodily suffering had totally disabled him for almost any
exertion of mind, more especially for such as demands and presupposes a
pleasurable and genial state of feeling; but, as a case that may by
possibility contribute a trifle to the medical history of opium, in a
further stage of its action than can often have been brought under the
notice of professional men, he has judged that it might be acceptable to
some readers to have it described more at length.  _Fiat experimentum in
corpore vili_ is a just rule where there is any reasonable presumption of
benefit to arise on a large scale.  What the benefit may be will admit of
a doubt, but there can be none as to the value of the body; for a more
worthless body than his own the author is free to confess cannot be.  It
is his pride to believe that it is the very ideal of a base, crazy,
despicable human system, that hardly ever could have been meant to be
seaworthy for two days under the ordinary storms and wear and tear of
life; and indeed, if that were the creditable way of disposing of human
bodies, he must own that he should almost be ashamed to bequeath his
wretched structure to any respectable dog.  But now to the case, which,
for the sake of avoiding the constant recurrence of a cumbersome
periphrasis, the author will take the liberty of giving in the first
person.

Those who have read the Confessions will have closed them with the
impression that I had wholly renounced the use of opium.  This impression
I meant to convey, and that for two reasons: first, because the very act
of deliberately recording such a state of suffering necessarily presumes
in the recorder a power of surveying his own case as a cool spectator,
and a degree of spirits for adequately describing it which it would be
inconsistent to suppose in any person speaking from the station of an
actual sufferer; secondly, because I, who had descended from so large a
quantity as 8,000 drops to so small a one (comparatively speaking) as a
quantity ranging between 300 and 160 drops, might well suppose that the
victory was in effect achieved.  In suffering my readers, therefore, to
think of me as of a reformed opium-eater, I left no impression but what I
shared myself; and, as may be seen, even this impression was left to be
collected from the general tone of the conclusion, and not from any
specific words, which are in no instance at variance with the literal
truth.  In no long time after that paper was written I became sensible
that the effort which remained would cost me far more energy than I had
anticipated, and the necessity for making it was more apparent every
month.  In particular I became aware of an increasing callousness or
defect of sensibility in the stomach, and this I imagined might imply a
scirrhous state of that organ, either formed or forming.  An eminent
physician, to whose kindness I was at that time deeply indebted, informed
me that such a termination of my case was not impossible, though likely
to be forestalled by a different termination in the event of my
continuing the use of opium.  Opium therefore I resolved wholly to abjure
as soon as I should find myself at liberty to bend my undivided attention
and energy to this purpose.  It was not, however, until the 24th of June
last that any tolerable concurrence of facilities for such an attempt
arrived.  On that day I began my experiment, having previously settled in
my own mind that I would not flinch, but would "stand up to the scratch"
under any possible "punishment."  I must premise that about 170 or 180
drops had been my ordinary allowance for many months; occasionally I had
run up as high as 500, and once nearly to 700; in repeated preludes to my
final experiment I had also gone as low as 100 drops; but had found it
impossible to stand it beyond the fourth day--which, by the way, I have
always found more difficult to get over than any of the preceding three.
I went off under easy sail--130 drops a day for three days; on the fourth
I plunged at once to 80.  The misery which I now suffered "took the
conceit" out of me at once, and for about a month I continued off and on
about this mark; then I sunk to 60, and the next day to--none at all.
This was the first day for nearly ten years that I had existed without
opium.  I persevered in my abstinence for ninety hours; i.e., upwards of
half a week.  Then I took--ask me not how much; say, ye severest, what
would ye have done?  Then I abstained again--then took about 25 drops
then abstained; and so on.

Meantime the symptoms which attended my case for the first six weeks of
my experiment were these: enormous irritability and excitement of the
whole system; the stomach in particular restored to a full feeling of
vitality and sensibility, but often in great pain; unceasing restlessness
night and day; sleep--I scarcely knew what it was; three hours out of the
twenty-four was the utmost I had, and that so agitated and shallow that I
heard every sound that was near me.  Lower jaw constantly swelling, mouth
ulcerated, and many other distressing symptoms that would be tedious to
repeat; amongst which, however, I must mention one, because it had never
failed to accompany any attempt to renounce opium--viz., violent
sternutation.  This now became exceedingly troublesome, sometimes lasting
for two hours at once, and recurring at least twice or three times a day.
I was not much surprised at this on recollecting what I had somewhere
heard or read, that the membrane which lines the nostrils is a
prolongation of that which lines the stomach; whence, I believe, are
explained the inflammatory appearances about the nostrils of dram
drinkers.  The sudden restoration of its original sensibility to the
stomach expressed itself, I suppose, in this way.  It is remarkable also
that during the whole period of years through which I had taken opium I
had never once caught cold (as the phrase is), nor even the slightest
cough.  But now a violent cold attacked me, and a cough soon after.  In
an unfinished fragment of a letter begun about this time to--I find these
words: "You ask me to write the--Do you know Beaumont and Fletcher's play
of "Thierry and Theodore"?  There you will see my case as to sleep; nor
is it much of an exaggeration in other features.  I protest to you that I
have a greater influx of thoughts in one hour at present than in a whole
year under the reign of opium.  It seems as though all the thoughts which
had been frozen up for a decade of years by opium had now, according to
the old fable, been thawed at once--such a multitude stream in upon me
from all quarters.  Yet such is my impatience and hideous irritability
that for one which I detain and write down fifty escape me: in spite of
my weariness from suffering and want of sleep, I cannot stand still or
sit for two minutes together.  'I nunc, et versus tecum meditare
canoros.'"

At this stage of my experiment I sent to a neighbouring surgeon,
requesting that he would come over to see me.  In the evening he came;
and after briefly stating the case to him, I asked this question; Whether
he did not think that the opium might have acted as a stimulus to the
digestive organs, and that the present state of suffering in the stomach,
which manifestly was the cause of the inability to sleep, might arise
from indigestion?  His answer was; No; on the contrary, he thought that
the suffering was caused by digestion itself, which should naturally go
on below the consciousness, but which from the unnatural state of the
stomach, vitiated by so long a use of opium, was become distinctly
perceptible.  This opinion was plausible; and the unintermitting nature
of the suffering disposes me to think that it was true, for if it had
been any mere _irregular_ affection of the stomach, it should naturally
have intermitted occasionally, and constantly fluctuated as to degree.
The intention of nature, as manifested in the healthy state, obviously is
to withdraw from our notice all the vital motions, such as the
circulation of the blood, the expansion and contraction of the lungs, the
peristaltic action of the stomach, &c., and opium, it seems, is able in
this, as in other instances, to counteract her purposes.  By the advice
of the surgeon I tried _bitters_.  For a short time these greatly
mitigated the feelings under which I laboured, but about the forty-second
day of the experiment the symptoms already noticed began to retire, and
new ones to arise of a different and far more tormenting class; under
these, but with a few intervals of remission, I have since continued to
suffer.  But I dismiss them undescribed for two reasons: first, because
the mind revolts from retracing circumstantially any sufferings from
which it is removed by too short or by no interval.  To do this with
minuteness enough to make the review of any use would be indeed _infandum
renovare dolorem_, and possibly without a sufficient motive; for
secondly, I doubt whether this latter state be anyway referable to
opium--positively considered, or even negatively; that is, whether it is
to be numbered amongst the last evils from the direct action of opium, or
even amongst the earliest evils consequent upon a _want_ of opium in a
system long deranged by its use.  Certainly one part of the symptoms
might be accounted for from the time of year (August), for though the
summer was not a hot one, yet in any case the sum of all the heat
_funded_ (if one may say so) during the previous months, added to the
existing heat of that month, naturally renders August in its better half
the hottest part of the year; and it so happened that--the excessive
perspiration which even at Christmas attends any great reduction in the
daily quantum of opium--and which in July was so violent as to oblige me
to use a bath five or six times a day--had about the setting-in of the
hottest season wholly retired, on which account any bad effect of the
heat might be the more unmitigated.  Another symptom--viz., what in my
ignorance I call internal rheumatism (sometimes affecting the shoulders,
&c., but more often appearing to be seated in the stomach)--seemed again
less probably attributable to the opium, or the want of opium, than to
the dampness of the house which I inhabit, which had about this time
attained its maximum, July having been, as usual, a month of incessant
rain in our most rainy part of England.

Under these reasons for doubting whether opium had any connexion with the
latter stage of my bodily wretchedness--except, indeed, as an occasional
cause, as having left the body weaker and more crazy, and thus
predisposed to any mal-influence whatever--I willingly spare my reader
all description of it; let it perish to him, and would that I could as
easily say let it perish to my own remembrances, that any future hours of
tranquillity may not be disturbed by too vivid an ideal of possible human
misery!

So much for the sequel of my experiment.  As to the former stage, in
which probably lies the experiment and its application to other cases, I
must request my reader not to forget the reasons for which I have
recorded it.  These were two: First, a belief that I might add some
trifle to the history of opium as a medical agent.  In this I am aware
that I have not at all fulfilled my own intentions, in consequence of the
torpor of mind, pain of body, and extreme disgust to the subject which
besieged me whilst writing that part of my paper; which part being
immediately sent off to the press (distant about five degrees of
latitude), cannot be corrected or improved.  But from this account,
rambling as it may be, it is evident that thus much of benefit may arise
to the persons most interested in such a history of opium, viz., to opium-
eaters in general, that it establishes, for their consolation and
encouragement, the fact that opium may be renounced, and without greater
sufferings than an ordinary resolution may support, and by a pretty rapid
course of descent.

To communicate this result of my experiment was my foremost purpose.
Secondly, as a purpose collateral to this, I wished to explain how it had
become impossible for me to compose a Third Part in time to accompany
this republication; for during the time of this experiment the
proof-sheets of this reprint were sent to me from London, and such was my
inability to expand or to improve them, that I could not even bear to
read them over with attention enough to notice the press errors or to
correct any verbal inaccuracies.  These were my reasons for troubling my
reader with any record, long or short, of experiments relating to so
truly base a subject as my own body; and I am earnest with the reader
that he will not forget them, or so far misapprehend me as to believe it
possible that I would condescend to so rascally a subject for its own
sake, or indeed for any less object than that of general benefit to
others.  Such an animal as the self-observing valetudinarian I know there
is; I have met him myself occasionally, and I know that he is the worst
imaginable _heautontimoroumenos_; aggravating and sustaining, by calling
into distinct consciousness, every symptom that would else perhaps, under
a different direction given to the thoughts, become evanescent.  But as
to myself, so profound is my contempt for this undignified and selfish
habit, that I could as little condescend to it as I could to spend my
time in watching a poor servant girl, to whom at this moment I hear some
lad or other making love at the back of my house.  Is it for a
Transcendental Philosopher to feel any curiosity on such an occasion?  Or
can I, whose life is worth only eight and a half years' purchase, be
supposed to have leisure for such trivial employments?  However, to put
this out of question, I shall say one thing, which will perhaps shock
some readers, but I am sure it ought not to do so, considering the
motives on which I say it.  No man, I suppose, employs much of his time
on the phenomena of his own body without some regard for it; whereas the
reader sees that, so far from looking upon mine with any complacency or
regard, I hate it, and make it the object of my bitter ridicule and
contempt; and I should not be displeased to know that the last
indignities which the law inflicts upon the bodies of the worst
malefactors might hereafter fall upon it.  And, in testification of my
sincerity in saying this, I shall make the following offer.  Like other
men, I have particular fancies about the place of my burial; having lived
chiefly in a mountainous region, I rather cleave to the conceit, that a
grave in a green churchyard amongst the ancient and solitary hills will
be a sublimer and more tranquil place of repose for a philosopher than
any in the hideous Golgothas of London.  Yet if the gentlemen of
Surgeons' Hall think that any benefit can redound to their science from
inspecting the appearances in the body of an opium-eater, let them speak
but a word, and I will take care that mine shall be legally secured to
them--i.e., as soon as I have done with it myself.  Let them not hesitate
to express their wishes upon any scruples of false delicacy and
consideration for my feelings; I assure them they will do me too much
honour by "demonstrating" on such a crazy body as mine, and it will give
me pleasure to anticipate this posthumous revenge and insult inflicted
upon that which has caused me so much suffering in this life.  Such
bequests are not common; reversionary benefits contingent upon the death
of the testator are indeed dangerous to announce in many cases: of this
we have a remarkable instance in the habits of a Roman prince, who used,
upon any notification made to him by rich persons that they had left him
a handsome estate in their wills, to express his entire satisfaction at
such arrangements and his gracious acceptance of those loyal legacies;
but then, if the testators neglected to give him immediate possession of
the property, if they traitorously "persisted in living" (_si vivere
perseverarent_, as Suetonius expresses it), he was highly provoked, and
took his measures accordingly.  In those times, and from one of the worst
of the Caesars, we might expect such conduct; but I am sure that from
English surgeons at this day I need look for no expressions of
impatience, or of any other feelings but such as are answerable to that
pure love of science and all its interests which induces me to make such
an offer.


     'Oh, eternity with outstretched wings, that broodest over the
     secret truths in whose roots lie the mysteries of man--his whence,
     his whither--have I searched thee, and struck a right key on thy
     dreadful organ!'


Suffering is a mightier agency in the hands of nature, as a Demiurgus
creating the intellect, than most people are aware of.

The truth I heard often in sleep from the lips of the Dark Interpreter.
Who is he? He is a shadow, reader, but a shadow with whom you must
suffer me to make you acquainted. You need not be afraid of him, for
when I explain his nature and origin you will see that he is essentially
inoffensive; or if sometimes he menaces with his countenance, that is
but seldom: and then, as his features in those moods shift as rapidly as
clouds in a gale of wind, you may always look for the terrific aspects
to vanish as fast as they have gathered. As to his origin--what it is, I
know exactly, but cannot without a little circuit of preparation make
_you_ understand. Perhaps you are aware of that power in the eye of many
children by which in darkness they project a vast theatre of
phantasmagorical figures moving forwards or backwards between their
bed-curtains and the chamber walls. In some children this power is
semi-voluntary--they can control or perhaps suspend the shows; but in
others it is altogether automatic. I myself, at the date of my last
confessions, had seen in this way more processions--generally solemn,
mournful, belonging to eternity, but also at times glad, triumphal
pomps, that seemed to enter the gates of Time--than all the religions of
paganism, fierce or gay, ever witnessed. Now, there is in the dark
places of the human spirit--in grief, in fear, in vindictive wrath--a
power of self-projection not unlike to this. Thirty years ago, it may
be, a man called Symons committed several murders in a sudden epilepsy
of planet-struck fury. According to my recollection, this case happened
at Hoddesdon, which is in Middlesex. 'Revenge is sweet!' was his hellish
motto on that occasion, and that motto itself records the abysses which
a human will can open. Revenge is _not_ sweet, unless by the mighty
charm of a charity that seeketh not her own it has become benignant.[1]
And what he had to revenge was woman's scorn. He had been a plain
farm-servant; and, in fact, he was executed, as such men often are, on a
proper point of professional respect to their calling, in a smock-frock,
or blouse, to render so ugly a clash of syllables. His young mistress
was every way and by much his superior, as well in prospects as in
education. But the man, by nature arrogant, and little acquainted with
the world, presumptuously raised his eyes to one of his young
mistresses. Great was the scorn with which she repulsed his audacity,
and her sisters participated in her disdain. Upon this affront he
brooded night and day; and, after the term of his service was over, and
he, in effect, forgotten by the family, one day he suddenly descended
amongst the women of the family like an Avatar of vengeance. Right and
left he threw out his murderous knife without distinction of person,
leaving the room and the passage floating in blood.

The final result of this carnage was not so terrific as it threatened to
be. Some, I think, recovered; but, also, one, who did _not_ recover, was
unhappily a stranger to the whole cause of his fury. Now, this murderer
always maintained, in conversation with the prison chaplain, that, as he
rushed on in his hellish career, he perceived distinctly a dark figure
on his right hand, keeping pace with himself. Upon _that_ the
superstitious, of course, supposed that some fiend had revealed himself,
and associated his superfluous presence with the dark atrocity. Symons
was not a philosopher, but my opinion is, that he was too much so to
tolerate that hypothesis, since, if there was one man in all Europe that
needed no tempter to evil on that evening, it was precisely Mr. Symons,
as nobody knew better than Mr. Symons himself. I had not the benefit of
his acquaintance, or I would have explained it to him. The fact is, in
point of awe a fiend would be a poor, trivial _bagatelle_ compared to
the shadowy projections, _umbras_ and _penumbras_, which the
unsearchable depths of man's nature is capable, under adequate
excitement, of throwing off, and even into stationary forms. I shall
have occasion to notice this point again. There are creative agencies in
every part of human nature, of which the thousandth part could never be
revealed in one life.


You have heard, reader, in vision which describes our Ladies of Sorrow,
particularly in the dark admonition of Madonna, to her wicked sister
that hateth and tempteth, what root of dark uses may lie in moral
convulsions: not the uses hypocritically vaunted by theatrical devotion
which affronts the majesty of God, that ever and in all things loves
Truth--prefers sincerity that is erring to piety that cants. Rebellion
which is the sin of witchcraft is more pardonable in His sight than
speechifying resignation, listening with complacency to its own
self-conquests. Show always as much neighbourhood as thou canst to grief
that abases itself, which will cost thee but little effort if thine own
grief hath been great. But God, who sees thy efforts in secret, will
slowly strengthen those efforts, and make that to be a real deed,
bearing tranquillity for thyself, which at first was but a feeble wish
breathing homage to _Him_.

In after-life, from twenty to twenty-four, on looking back to those
struggles of my childhood, I used to wonder exceedingly that a child
could be exposed to struggles on such a scale. But two views unfolded
upon me as my experience widened, which took away that wonder. The first
was the vast scale upon which the sufferings of children are found
everywhere expanded in the realities of life. The generation of infants
which you see is but part of those who belong to it; were born in it;
and make, the world over, not one half of it. The missing half, more
than an equal number to those of any age that are now living, have
perished by every kind of torments. Three thousand children per
annum--that is, three hundred thousand per century; that is (omitting
Sundays), about ten every day--pass to heaven through flames[2] in this
very island of Great Britain. And of those who survive to reach
maturity what multitudes have fought with fierce pangs of hunger, cold,
and nakedness! When I came to know all this, then reverting my eye to
_my_ struggle, I said oftentimes it was nothing! Secondly, in watching
the infancy of my own children, I made another discovery--it is well
known to mothers, to nurses, and also to philosophers--that the tears
and lamentations of infants during the year or so when they have no
_other_ language of complaint run through a gamut that is as
inexhaustible as the cremona of Paganini. An ear but moderately learned
in that language cannot be deceived as to the rate and _modulus_ of the
suffering which it indicates. A fretful or peevish cry cannot by any
efforts make itself impassioned. The cry of impatience, of hunger, of
irritation, of reproach, of alarm, are all different--different as a
chorus of Beethoven from a chorus of Mozart. But if ever you saw an
infant suffering for an hour, as sometimes the healthiest does, under
some attack of the stomach, which has the tiger-grasp of the Oriental
cholera, then you will hear moans that address to their mothers an
anguish of supplication for aid such as might storm the heart of Moloch.
Once hearing it, you will not forget it. Now, it was a constant remark
of mine, after any storm of that nature (occurring, suppose, once in two
months), that always on the following day, when a long, long sleep had
chased away the darkness and the memory of the darkness from the little
creature's brain, a sensible expansion had taken place in the
intellectual faculties of attention, observation, and animation. It
renewed the case of our great modern poet, who, on listening to the
raving of the midnight storm, and the crashing which it was making in
the mighty woods, reminded himself that all this hell of trouble

    'Tells also of bright calms that shall succeed.'

Pain driven to agony, or grief driven to frenzy, is essential to the
ventilation of profound natures. A sea which is deeper than any that
Count Massigli measured cannot be searched and torn up from its
sleeping depths without a levanter or a monsoon. A nature which is
profound in excess, but also introverted and abstracted in excess, so as
to be in peril of wasting itself in interminable reverie, cannot be
awakened sometimes without afflictions that go to the very foundations,
heaving, stirring, yet finally harmonizing; and it is in such cases that
the Dark Interpreter does his work, revealing the worlds of pain and
agony and woe possible to man--possible even to the innocent spirit of a
child.

As nothing which is impassioned escapes the eye of poetry, neither has
this escaped it--that there is, or may be, through solitude, 'sublime
attractions of the grave.' But even poetry has not perceived that these
attractions may arise for a child. Not, indeed, a passion for the grave
_as_ the grave--from _that_ a child revolts; but a passion for the grave
as the portal through which it may recover some heavenly countenance,
mother or sister, that has vanished. Through solitude this passion may
be exalted into a frenzy like a nympholepsy. At first, when in childhood
we find ourselves torn away from the lips that we could hang on for
ever, we throw out our arms in vain struggles to snatch at them, and
pull them back again. But when we have felt for a time how hopeless is
that effort, and that they cannot come to _us_, we desist from that
struggle, and next we whisper to our hearts, Might not we go to _them_?

Such in principle and origin was the famous _Dulce Domum_[4] of the
English schoolboy. Such is the _Heimweh_ (home-sickness) of the German
and Swiss soldier in foreign service. Such is the passion of the
Calenture. Doubtless, reader, you have seen it described. The poor
sailor is in tropical latitudes; deep, breathless calms have prevailed
for weeks. Fever and delirium are upon him. Suddenly from his restless
hammock he starts up; he will fret no longer in darkness; he ascends
upon deck. How motionless are the deeps! How vast--how sweet are these
shining zaarrahs of water! He gazes, and slowly under the blazing
scenery of his brain the scenery of his eye unsettles. The waters are
swallowed up; the seas have disappeared. Green fields appear, a silent
dell, and a pastoral cottage. Two faces appear--are at the door--sweet
female faces, and behold they beckon him. 'Come to us!' they seem to
say. The picture rises to his wearied brain like a _sanctus_ from the
choir of a cathedral, and in the twinkling of an eye, stung to madness
by the cravings of his heart, the man is overboard. He is gone--he is
lost for this world; but if he missed the arms of the lovely women--wife
and sister--whom he sought, assuredly he has settled into arms that are
mightier and not less indulgent.

I, young as I was, had one feeling not learned from books, and that
_could_ not have been learned from books, the deepest of all that
connect themselves with natural scenery. It is the feeling which in 'The
Hart-leap Well' of Wordsworth, in his 'Danish Boy,' and other exquisite
poems is brought out, viz., the breathless, mysterious, Pan-like silence
that haunts the noon-day. If there were winds abroad, then I was roused
myself into sympathetic tumults. But if this dead silence haunted the
air, then the peace which was in nature echoed another peace which lay
in graves, and I fell into a sick languishing for things which a voice
from heaven seemed to say '_cannot_ be granted.'

There is a German superstition, which eight or ten years after I read,
of the Erl-king and his daughter. The daughter had power to tempt
infants away into the invisible world; but it is, as the reader
understands, by collusion with some infirmity of sick desire for such
worlds in the infant itself.

    'Who is that rides through the forest so fast?'

It is a knight who carries his infant upon his saddle-bow. The
Erl-king's daughter rides by his side; and, in words audible only when
she means them to be heard, she says:

    'If thou wilt, dear baby, with me go away,
     We will see a fine show, we will play a fine play.'

That sounds lovely to my ears. Oh yes, that collusion with dim sleeping
infancy is lovely to me; but I was too advanced in intellect to have
been tempted by _such_ temptations. Still there was a perilous
attraction for me in worlds that slept and rested; and if the Erl-king's
daughter had revealed herself to my perceptions, there was one 'show'
that she might have promised which would have wiled me away with her
into the dimmest depths of the mightiest and remotest forests.

In my dreams were often prefigurements of my future, as I could not but
read the signs. What man has not some time in dewy morn, or sequestered
eve, or in the still night-watches, when deep sleep falleth on other men
but visiteth not his weary eyelids--what man, I say, has not some time
hushed his spirit and questioned with himself whether some things seen
or obscurely felt, were not anticipated as by mystic foretaste in some
far halcyon time, post-natal or ante-natal he knew not; only assuredly
he knew that for him past and present and future merged in one awful
moment of lightning revelation. Oh, spirit that dwelleth in man, how
subtle are _thy_ revelations; how deep, how delirious the raptures thou
canst inspire; how poignant the stings with which thou canst pierce the
heart; how sweet the honey with which thou assuagest the wound; how dark
the despairs and accusings that lie behind thy curtains, and leap upon
us like lightning from the cloud, with the sense as of some heavenly
blazoning, and oftentimes carry us beyond ourselves!

It is a sweet morning in June, and the fragrance of the roses is wafted
towards me as I move--for I am walking in a lawny meadow, still wet
with dew--and a wavering mist lies over the distance. Suddenly it seems
to lift, and out of the dewy dimness emerges a cottage, embowered with
roses and clustering clematis; and the hills, in which it is set like a
gem, are tree-clad, and rise billowy behind it, and to the right and to
the left are glistening expanses of water. Over the cottage there hangs
a halo, as if clouds had but parted there. From the door of that cottage
emerges a figure, the countenance full of the trepidation of some dread
woe feared or remembered. With waving arm and tearful uplifted face the
figure first beckons me onward, and then, when I have advanced some
yards, frowning, warns me away. As I still continue to advance, despite
the warning, darkness falls: figure, cottage, hills, trees, and halo
fade and disappear; and all that remains to me is the look on the face
of her that beckoned and warned me away. I read that glance as by the
inspiration of a moment. We had been together; together we had entered
some troubled gulf; struggled together, suffered together. Was it as
lovers torn asunder by calamity? was it as combatants forced by bitter
necessity into bitter feud, when we only, in all the world, yearned for
peace together? Oh, what a searching glance was that which she cast on
me! as if she, being now in the spiritual world, abstracted from flesh,
remembered things that I could not remember. Oh, how I shuddered as the
sweet sunny eyes in the sweet sunny morning of June--the month that was
my 'angelical'; half spring, yet with summer dress, that to me was very
'angelical'--seemed reproachfully to challenge in me recollections of
things passed thousands of years ago (old indeed, yet that were made new
again for us, because now first it was that we met again). Oh, heavens!
it came over me as doth the raven over the infected house, as from a bed
of violets sweeps the saintly odour of corruption. What a glimpse was
thus revealed! glory in despair, as of that gorgeous vegetation that hid
the sterilities of the grave in the tropics of that summer long ago; of
that heavenly beauty which slept side by side within my sister's coffin
in the month of June; of those saintly swells that rose from an infinite
distance--I know not whether to or from my sister. Could this be a
memorial of that nature? Are the nearer and more distant stages of life
thus dimly connected, and the connection hidden, but suddenly revealed
for a moment?

This lady for years appeared to me in dreams; in that, considering the
electric character of my dreams, and that they were far less like a lake
reflecting the heavens than like the pencil of some mighty artist--Da
Vinci or Michael Angelo--that cannot copy in simplicity, but comments in
freedom, while reflecting in fidelity, there was nothing to surprise.
But a change in this appearance was remarkable. Oftentimes, after eight
years had passed, she appeared in summer dawn at a window. It was a
window that opened on a balcony. This feature only gave a distinction, a
refinement, to the aspect of the cottage--else all was simplicity.
Spirit of Peace, dove-like dawn that slept upon the cottage, ye were not
broken by any participation in my grief and despair! For ever the vision
of that cottage was renewed. Did I roam in the depths of sweet pastoral
solitudes in the West, with the tinkling of sheep-bells in my ears, a
rounded hillock, seen vaguely, would shape itself into a cottage; and at
the door my monitory, regretful Hebe would appear. Did I wander by the
seashore, one gently-swelling wave in the vast heaving plain of waters
would suddenly transform itself into a cottage, and I, by some
involuntary inward impulse, would in fancy advance toward it.

Ah, reader, you will think this which I am going to say too near, too
holy, for recital. But not so. The deeper a woe touches me in heart, so
much the more am I urged to recite it. The world disappears: I see only
the grand reliques of a world--memorials of a love that has departed,
has been--the record of a sorrow that is, and has its greyness converted
into verdure--monuments of a wrath that has been reconciled, of a wrong
that has been atoned for--convulsions of a storm that has gone by. What
I am going to say is the most like a superstitious thing that I ever
shall say. And I have reason to think that every man who is not a
villain once in his life must be superstitious. It is a tribute which he
pays to human frailty, which tribute if he will not pay, which frailty
if he will not share, then also he shall not have any of its strength.

The face of this monitory Hebe haunted me for some years in a way that I
must faintly attempt to explain. It is little to say that it was the
sweetest face, with the most peculiar expression of sweetness, that I
had ever seen: that was much, but that was earthly. There was something
more terrific, believe me, than this; yet that was not the word: terror
looks to the future; and this perhaps did, but not primarily. Chiefly it
looked at some unknown past, and was for that reason awful; yes,
awful--that was the word.

Thus, on any of those heavenly sunny mornings, that now are buried in an
endless grave, did I, transported by no human means, enter that cottage,
and descend to that breakfast-room, my earliest salute was to her, that
ever, as the look of pictures do, with her eyes pursued me round the
room, and oftentimes with a subtle checking of grief, as if great sorrow
had been or would be hers. And it was, too, in the sweet Maytime. Oh
yes; she was but as if she had been--as if it were her original ...
chosen to have been the aurora of a heavenly clime; and then suddenly
she was as one of whom, for some thousand years, Paradise had received
no report; then, again, as if she entered the gates of Paradise not less
innocent; and, again, as if she could not enter; and some blame--but I
knew not what blame--was mine; and now she looked as though broken with
a woe that no man could read, as she sought to travel back to her early
joy--yet no longer a joy that is sublime in innocency, but a joy from
which sprung abysses of memories polluted into anguish, till her tears
seemed to be suffused with drops of blood. All around was peace and the
deep silence of untroubled solitude; only in the lovely lady was a sign
of horror, that had slept, under deep ages of frost, in her heart, and
now rose, as with the rushing of wings, to her face. Could it be
supposed that one life--so pitiful a thing--was what moved her care? Oh
no; it was, or it seemed, as if this poor wreck of a life happened to be
that one which determined the fate of some thousand others. Nothing
less; nothing so abject as one poor fifty years--nothing less than a
century of centuries could have stirred the horror that rose to her
lovely lips, as once more she waved me away from the cottage.

Oh, reader, five years after I saw that sweet face in reality--saw it in
the flesh; saw that pomp of womanhood; saw that cottage; saw a thousand
times that lovely domicile that heard the cooing of the solitary dove in
the solitary morning; saw the grace of childhood and the shadows of
graves that lay, like creatures asleep, in the sunshine; saw, also, the
horror, somehow realized as a shadowy reflection from myself, which
warned me off from that cottage, and which still rings through the
dreams of five-and-twenty years.


The general sentiment or sense of pre-existence, of which this
_Suspiria_ may be regarded as one significant and affecting
illustration, had this record in the outset of the 'Reminiscences of
Wordsworth':

'Oh, sense of mysterious pre-existence, by which, through years, in
which as yet a stranger to those valleys of Westmoreland, I viewed
myself as a phantom self--a second identity projected from my own
consciousness, and already living amongst them--how was it, and by what
prophetic instinct, that already I said to myself oftentimes, when
chasing day-dreams along the pictures of these wild mountainous
labyrinths, which as yet I had not traversed, "Here, in some distant
year, I shall be shaken with love, and there with stormiest grief and
regret"? Whence was it that sudden revelations came upon me, like the
drawings up of a curtain, and closing again as rapidly, of scenes that
made the future heaven of my life? And how was it that in thought I
_was_, and yet in reality _was not_, a denizen, already, in 1803, 1804,
1805, of lakes and forest lawns, which I never saw till 1807? and that,
by a prophetic instinct of heart, I rehearsed and lived over, as it
were, in vision those chapters of my life which have carried with them
the weightiest burden of joy and sorrow, and by the margin of those very
lakes and hills with which I prefigured this connection? and, in short,
that for me, by a transcendent privilege, during the novitiate of my
life, most truly I might say:

    '"In to-day already walked to-morrow."'

There is a story told in the 'Arabian Nights' of a princess who, by
overlooking one seed of a pomegranate, precipitated the event which she
had laboured to make impossible. She lies in wait for the event which
she foresees. The pomegranate swells, opens, splits; the seeds, which
she knows to be roots of evil, rapidly she swallows; but one--only
one--before it could be arrested, rolls away into a river. It is lost!
it is irrecoverable! She has triumphed, but she must perish. Already she
feels the flames mounting up which are to consume her, and she calls for
water hastily--not to deliver herself (for that is impossible), but,
nobly forgetting her own misery, that she may prevent that destruction
of her brother mortal which had been the original object for hazarding
her own. Yet why go to Arabian fictions? Even in our daily life is
exhibited, in proportions far more gigantic, that tendency to swell and
amplify itself into mountains of darkness, which exists oftentimes in
germs that are imperceptible. An error in human choice, an infirmity in
the human will, though it were at first less than a mote, though it
should swerve from the right line by an interval less than any thread

    'That ever spider twisted from her womb,'

sometimes begins to swell, to grow, to widen its distance rapidly,
travels off into boundless spaces remote from the true centre, spaces
incalculable and irretraceable, until hope seems extinguished and return
impossible. Such was the course of my own opium career. Such is the
history of human errors every day. Such was the original sin of the
Greek theories on Deity, which could not have been healed but by putting
off their own nature, and kindling into a new principle--absolutely
undiscoverable, as I contend, for the Grecian intellect.

Oftentimes an echo goes as it were to sleep: the series of
reverberations has died away. Suddenly a second series awakens: this
subsides, then a third wakens up. So of actions done in youth. After
great tumults all is quieted. You dream that they are over. In a moment,
in the twinkling of an eye, on some fatal morning in middle-life the
far-off consequences come back upon you. And you say to yourself, 'Oh,
Heaven, if I had fifty lives this crime would reappear, as Pelion upon
Ossa!' So was it with my affection. Left to natural peace, I might have
conquered it: _Verschmerzeon_. To charm it down by the mere suffering of
grief, to hush it by endurance, that was the natural policy--that was
the natural process. But behold! A new form of sorrow arises, and the
two multiply together. And the worm which was beginning to fall asleep
is roused again to pestilential fierceness.

Mystery unfathomable of Death! Mystery unapproachable of God! Destined
it was, from the foundations of the world, that each mystery should make
war upon the other: once that the lesser mystery should swallow up for a
moment a _limbus_ of the greater; and that woe is past: once that the
greater mystery should swallow up for ever the whole vortex of the
lesser; and that glory is yet to come. After which man, that is the son
of God, shall lift up his eyes for ever, saying, 'Behold! these were two
mysteries; and one is not; and there is but one mystery that survives
for ever!'


If an eternity (Death supposed) is as vast as a star, yet the most
miserable of earthly blocks not four feet square will eclipse, masque,
hide it from centre to circumference. And so it really is. Incredible as
it might seem apart from experience, the dreadful reality of death is
utterly withdrawn from us because itself dwindles to an apparent mote,
and the perishing non-reality thickens into a darkness as massy as a
rock.


Great changes summon to great meditations. Daily we see the most joyous
of events take a colouring of solemnity from the mere relation in which
they stand to an uncertain future: the birth of a child, heir to the
greatest expectations, and welcomed clamorously by the sympathy of
myriads, speaks to the more reflecting in an undertone of monitory
sadness, were it only as a tribute to the frailty of human expectations:
and a marriage-day, of all human events the most lawfully festal, yet
needs something of effort to chase away the boding sadness which settles
unavoidably upon any new career; the promise is vague, but new hopes
have created new dangers, and responsibilities contracted perhaps with
rapture are charged with menace.


For every one of us, male or female, there is a year of crisis--a year
of solemn and conscious transition, a year in which the light-hearted
sense of the _irresponsible_ ceases to gild the heavenly dawn. A year
there is, settled by no law or usage, for me perhaps the eighteenth, for
you the seventeenth, for another the nineteenth, within the gates of
which, underneath the gloomy archway of which, sits a phantom of
yourself.


Turn a screw, tighten a linch-pin--which is not to disease, but perhaps
to exalt, the mighty machinery of the brain--and the Infinities appear,
before which the tranquillity of man unsettles, the gracious forms of
life depart, and the ghostly enters. So profoundly is this true, that
oftentimes I have said of my own tremendous experience in this
region--destined too certainly, I fear, finally to swallow up intellect
and the life of life in the heart, unless God of His mercy fetches me
away by some sudden death--that death, considered as an entrance to this
ghostly world, is but a postern-gate by comparison with the
heaven-aspiring vestibule through which this world of the Infinite
introduces the ghostly world.


Time, if it does not diminish grief, alters its character. At first we
stretch out our hands in very blindness of heart, as if trying to draw
back again those whom we have lost. But, after a season, when the
impotence of such efforts has become too sensibly felt, finding that
they will not come back to us, a strange fascination arises which yearns
after some mode of going to _them_. There is a gulf fixed which
childhood rarely can pass. But we link our wishes with whatsoever would
gently waft us over. We stretch out our hands, and say, 'Sister, lend us
thy help, and plead for us with God, that we may pass over without much
agony.'


The joy of an infant, or joy-generation, without significance to an
unprofound and common mind--how strange to see the excess of pathos in
that; yet men of any (or at least of much) sensibility see in this a
transpicuous masque for another form, viz., the eternal ground of sorrow
in all human hearts. This, by the way, in an essay on William
Wordsworth, should be noticed as the charm of his poetry; and the note
differential, in fact. At least, I know not of any former poet who has
so systematically sought his sadness in the very luxury of joy. Thus, in
the 'Two April Mornings,' 'what a mortal freshness of dewy radiance!
what an attraction of early summer! what a vision of roses in June! Yet
it is all transmuted to a purpose of sadness.'


Ah, reader, scorn not that which--whether you refuse it or not as the
reality of realities--is assuredly the reality of dreams, linking us to
a far vaster cycle, in which the love and the languishing, the ruin and
the horror, of this world are but moments--but elements in an eternal
circle. The cycle stretches from an East that is forgotten to a West
that is but conjectured. The mere fact of your own individual calamity
is a life; the tragedy is a nature; the hope is but as a dim augury
written on a flower.


If the things that have fretted us had not some art for retiring into
secret oblivion, what a hell would life become! Now, understand how in
some nervous derangements this horror really takes place. Some things
that had sunk into utter forgetfulness, others that had faded into
visionary power, all rise as gray phantoms from the dust; the field of
our earthly combats that should by rights have settled into peace, is
all alive with hosts of resurrections--cavalries that sweep in gusty
charges--columns that thunder from afar--arms gleaming through clouds of
sulphur.


God takes care for the religion of little children wheresoever His
Christianity exists. Wheresoever there is a national Church established,
to which a child sees all his protectors resort; wheresoever he beholds
amongst earthly creatures whom most he honours prostrate in devotion
before these illimitable heavens, which fill to overflowing the total
capacities of his young adoring heart; wheresoever at intervals he
beholds the sleep of death, falling upon the men or women whom he has
seen--a depth stretching as far below his power to fathom as those
persons ascend beyond his powers to pursue--God speaks to their hearts
by dreams and their tumultuous grandeurs. Even by solitude does God
speak to little children, when made vocal by the services of
Christianity, as also he does by darkness wheresoever it is peopled
with visions of His almighty power. For a pagan child, for a Greek
child, solitude was nothing; for a Christian child it is made the power
of God, and the hieroglyphic of His most distant truth. The solitude in
life is deep for the millions who have none to love them, and deep for
those who suffer by secret and incommunicable woe and have none to pity
them. Thus, be you assured that though infancy talks least of that which
slumbers deepest, it yet rests in its own transcendent solitude. But
infancy, you say, talks surely most of that which is uppermost in its
heart. Yes, doubtless of that which is uppermost, but not at all of that
which slumbers below the foundations of its heart.

The loveliest sight that a woman's eye opens upon in this world is her
first-born child; and the holiest sight upon which the eyes of God
settle in Almighty sanction and perfect blessing is the love which soon
kindles between the mother and her infant: mute and speechless on the
one side, with no language but tears and kisses and looks. Beautiful is
the philosophy ... which arises out of that reflection or passion
connected with the transition that has produced it. First comes the
whole mighty drama of love, purified[6] ever more and more, how often
from grosser feelings, yet of necessity through its very elements,
oscillating between the finite and the infinite: the haughtiness of
womanly pride, so dignified, yet not always free from the near contagion
of error; the romance so ennobling, yet not always entirely reasonable;
the tender dawn of opening sentiments, pointing to an idea in all this
which it neither can reach nor could long sustain. Think of the great
storm of agitation, and fear and hope, through which, in her earliest
days of womanhood, every woman must naturally pass, fulfilling a law of
her Creator, yet a law which rests upon her mixed constitution; animal,
though indefinitely ascending to what is non-animal--as a daughter of
man, frail ... and imperfect, yet also as a daughter of God, standing
erect, with eyes to the heavens. Next, when the great vernal passover of
sexual tenderness and romance has fulfilled its purpose, we see, rising
as a Phoenix from this great mystery of ennobled instincts, another
mystery, much more profound, more affecting, more divine--not so much a
rapture as a blissful repose of a Sabbath, which swallows up the more
perishing story of the first; forcing the vast heart of female nature
through stages of ascent, forcing it to pursue the transmigrations of
the Psyche from the aurelic condition, so glowing in its colour, into
the winged creature which mixes with the mystery of the dawn, and
ascends to the altar of the infinite heavens, rising by a ladder of
light from that sympathy which God surveys with approbation; and even
more so as He beholds it self-purifying under His Christianity to that
sympathy which needs no purification, but is the holiest of things on
this earth, and that in which God most reveals Himself through the
nature of humanity.

Well is it for the glorification of human nature that through these the
vast majority of women must for ever pass; well also that, by placing
its sublime germs near to female youth, God thus turns away by
anticipation the divinest of disciplines from the rapacious absorption
of the grave. Time is found--how often--for those who are early summoned
into rendering back their glorious privilege, who yet have tasted in
its first-fruits the paradise of maternal love.

And pertaining also to this part of the subject, I will tell you a
result of my own observations of no light importance to women.

It is this: Nineteen times out of twenty I have remarked that the true
paradise of a female life in all ranks, not too elevated for constant
intercourse with the children, is by no means the years of courtship,
nor the earliest period of marriage, but that sequestered chamber of her
experience, in which a mother is left alone through the day, with
servants perhaps in a distant part of the house, and (God be thanked!)
chiefly where there are no servants at all, she is attended by one sole
companion, her little first-born angel, as yet clinging to her robe,
imperfectly able to walk, still more imperfect in its prattling and
innocent thoughts, clinging to her, haunting her wherever she goes as
her shadow, catching from her eye the total inspiration of its little
palpitating heart, and sending to hers a thrill of secret pleasure so
often as its little fingers fasten on her own. Left alone from morning
to night with this one companion, or even with three, still wearing the
graces of infancy; buds of various stages upon the self-same tree, a
woman, if she has the great blessing of approaching such a luxury of
paradise, is moving--too often not aware that she is moving--through the
divinest section of her life. As evening sets in, the husband, through
all walks of life, from the highest professional down to that of common
labour, returns home to vary her modes of conversation by such thoughts
and interests as are more consonant with his more extensive capacities
of intellect. But by that time her child (or her children) will be
reposing on the little couch, and in the morning, duly as the sun
ascends in power, she sees before her a long, long day of perfect
pleasure in this society which evening will bring to her, but which is
interwoven with every fibre of her sensibilities. This condition of
noiseless, quiet love is that, above all, which God blesses and smiles
upon.

It is not for so idle a purpose as that of showing the Pagan
backsliding--that is too evident--but for a far subtler purpose, and one
which no man has touched, viz., the incapacity of creating grandeur for
the Pagans, even with _carte blanche_ in their favour, that I write this
paper. Nothing is more incomprehensible than the following fact--nothing
than this when mastered and understood is more thoroughly
instructive--the fact that having a wide, a limitless field open before
them, free to give and to take away at their own pleasure, the Pagans
could not invest their Gods with any iota of grandeur. Diana, when you
translate her into the Moon, then indeed partakes in all the _natural_
grandeur of a planet associated with a dreamy light, with forests,
forest lawns, etc., or the wild accidents of a huntress. But the Moon
and the Huntress are surely not the creations of Pagans, nor indebted to
them for anything but the murderous depluming which Pagan mythology has
operated upon all that is in earth or in the waters that are under the
earth. Now, why could not the ancients raise one little scintillating
glory in behalf of their monstrous deities? So far are they from thus
raising Jupiter, that he is sometimes made the ground of nature (not,
observe, for any positive reason that they had for any relation that
Jupiter had to Creation, but simply for the negative reason that they
had nobody else)--never does Jupiter seem more disgusting than when as
just now in a translation of the 'Batrachia' I read that Jupiter had
given to frogs an amphibious nature, making the awful, ancient,
first-born secrets of Chaos to be his, and thus forcing into contrast
and remembrance his odious personality.

Why, why, why could not the Romans, etc., make a grandeur for their
Gods? Not being able to make them grand, they daubed them with finery.
All that people imagine in the Jupiter Olympus of Phidias--_they_
themselves confer. But an apostle is beyond their reach.

When, be it well observed, the cruel and dark religions are far more
successful than those of Greece and Rome, for Osiris, etc., by the might
of the devil, of darkness, are truly terrific. Cybele stands as a middle
term half-way between these dark forms and the Greek or Roman. Pluto is
the very model of a puny attempt at darkness utterly failing. He looks
big; he paints himself histrionically; he soots his face; he has a
masterful dog, nothing half so fearful as a wolf-dog or bloodhound; and
he raises his own _manes_, poor, stridulous Struldbrugs.

Vainly did the ancient Pagans fight against this fatal weakness.

They may confer upon their Gods glittering titles of 'ambrosial,'
'immortal'; but the human mind is careless of positive assertion, and of
clamorous iteration in however angry a tone, when silently it observes
stealing out of facts already conceded some fatal consequence at war
with all these empty pretensions--mortal even in _the virtual_
conceptions of the Pagans. If the Pagan Gods were really immortal, if
essentially they repelled the touch of mortality, and not through the
adulatory homage of their worshipers causing their true aspects to
unsettle or altogether to disappear in clouds of incense, then how came
whole dynasties of Gods to pass away, and no man could tell whither? If
really they defied the grave, then how was it that age and the
infirmities of age passed upon them like the shadow of eclipse upon the
golden faces of the planets? If Apollo were a beardless young man, his
father was not such--_he_ was in the vigour of maturity; maturity is a
flattering term for expressing it, but it means _past youth_--and his
grandfather was superannuated. But even this grandfather, who _had_ been
once what Apollo was now, could not pretend to more than a transitory
station in the long succession of Gods. Other dynasties, known even to
man, there had been before his; and elder dynasties before _that_, of
whom only rumours and suspicions survived. Even this taint, however,
this _direct_ access of mortality, was less shocking to my mind in
after-years than the abominable fact of its reflex or indirect access in
the shape of grief for others who had died. I need not multiply
instances; they are without end. The reader has but to throw his memory
back upon the anguish of Jupiter, in the 'Iliad,' for the approaching
death of his son Sarpedon, and his vain struggles to deliver himself
from this ghastly net; or upon Thetis, fighting against the vision of
her matchless Pelides caught in the same vortex; or upon the Muse in
Euripides, hovering in the air and wailing over her young Rhesus, her
brave, her beautiful one, of whom she trusted that he had been destined
to confound the Grecian host. What! a God, and liable to the pollution
of grief! A Goddess, and standing every hour within the peril of that
dismal shadow!

Here in one moment mark the recoil, the intolerable recoil, upon the
Pagan mind, of that sting which vainly they pretended to have conquered
on behalf of their Pantheon. Did the reader fancy that I was fatiguing
myself with any task so superfluous as that of proving the Gods of the
heathen to be no Gods? In that case he has not understood me. My object
is to show that the ancients, that even the Greeks, could not support
the idea of immortality. The idea crumbled to pieces under their touch.
In realizing that idea unconsciously, they suffered elements to slip in
which defeated its very essence in the result; and not by accident:
other elements they could not have found. Doubtless an insolent Grecian
philosopher would say, 'Surely, I knew that immortality meant the being
liberated from mortality.' Yes, but this is no more than the negative
idea, and the demand is to give the affirmative idea. Or perhaps I shall
better explain my meaning by substituting other terms with my own
illustration of their value. I say, then, that the Greek idea of
immortality involves only the nominal idea, not the real idea. Now, the
nominal idea (or, which is the same thing, the nominal definition) is
that which simply sketches the outline of an object in the shape of a
problem; whereas the real definition fills up that outline and solves
that problem. The nominal definition states the conditions under which
an object would be realized for the mind; the real definition executes
those conditions. The nominal definition, that I may express it most
briefly and pointedly, puts a _question_; the real definition _answers_
that question. Thus, to give our illustration, the insoluble problem of
squaring the circle presents us with a good nominal idea. There is no
vagueness at all in the idea of such a square; it is that square which,
when a given circle is laid before you, would present the same
superficial contents in such exquisite truth of repetition that the eye
of God could detect no shadow of more or of less. Nothing can be plainer
than the demand--than the question. But as to the answer, as to the
_real_ conditions under which this demand can be realized, all the wit
of man has not been able to do more than approach it. Or, again, the
idea of a _perfect commonwealth_, clear enough as a nominal idea, is in
its infancy as a real idea. Or, perhaps, a still more lively
illustration to some readers may be the idea of _perpetual motion_.
Nominally--that is, as an idea sketched problem-wise--what is plainer?
You are required to assign some principle of motion such that it shall
revolve through the parts of a mechanism self-sustained. Suppose those
parts to be called by the names of our English alphabet, and to stand in
the order of our alphabet, then A is through B C D, etc., to pass down
with its total power upon Z, which reciprocally is to come round
undiminished upon A B C, etc., for ever. Never was a _nominal_
definition of what you want more simple and luminous. But coming to the
_real_ definition, and finding that every letter in succession must
still give something less than is received--that O, for instance, cannot
give to P all which it received from N--then no matter for the
triviality of the loss in each separate case, always it is gathering and
accumulating; your hands drop down in despair; you feel that a principle
of death pervades the machinery; retard it you may, but come it will at
last. And a proof remains behind, as your only result, that whilst the
nominal definition may sometimes run before the real definition for
ages, and yet finally be overtaken by it, in other cases the one flies
hopelessly before the pursuit of the other, defies it, and never _will_
be overtaken to the end of time.

That fate, that necessity, besieged the Grecian idea of immortality.
Rise from forgotten dust, my Plato; Stagyrite, stand up from the grave;
Anaxagoras, with thy bright, cloudless intellect that searched the
skies, Heraclitus, with thy gloomy, mysterious intellect that fathomed
the deeps, come forward and execute for me this demand. How shall that
immortality, which you give, which you _must_ give as a trophy of honour
to your Pantheon, sustain itself against the blights from those
humanities which also, by an equal necessity, starting from your basis,
give you must to that Pantheon? How will you prevent the sad reflux of
that tide which finally engulfs all things under any attempt to execute
the nominal idea of a Deity? You cannot do it. Weave your divinities in
that Grecian loom of yours, and no skill in the workmanship, nor care
that wisdom can devise, will ever cure the fatal flaws in the texture:
for the mortal taint lies not so much in your work as in the original
errors of your loom.

Ask any well-informed man at random what he supposes to have been done
with the sacrifices, he will answer that really he never thought about
it, but that naturally he supposes the flesh was burnt upon the altars.
Not at all, reader; a sacrifice to the Gods meant universally a banquet
to man. He who gave a splendid public dinner announced in other words
that he designed to celebrate a sacrificial rite. This was of course.
He, on the other hand, who announced a sacrificial pomp did in other
words proclaim by sound of trumpet that he gave a dinner. This was of
necessity. Hence, when Agamemnon offers a hecatomb to Jupiter, his
brother Menelaus walks in to dinner, [Greek: hachlêtost], without
invitation. As a brother, we are told by Homer that no invitation was
required. He had the privilege of what in German is beautifully called
'ein Kind des Hauses,' a child of the house. This dispensation from the
necessity of a formal invitation Homer explains, but as to explanation
how he knew that there was a dinner, that he passes over as superfluous.
A vast herd of oxen could not be sacrificed without open and public
display of the preparation, and that a human banquet must accompany a
divine sacrifice--this was so much a self-evident truth that Homer does
not trouble himself to make so needless an explanation.

Hence, therefore, a case of legislation in St. Paul's Christian
administration, which I will venture to say few readers understand. Take
the Feast of Ephesus. Here, as in all cities of Asia Minor and Greece,
the Jews lived in great numbers. The universal hospitality over all
these regions was exhibited in dinners ([Greek: dehipna]). Now, it
happened not sometimes, but always, that he who gave a dinner had on the
same day made a sacrifice at the Great Temple; nay, the dinner was
always part of the sacrifice, and thus the following dilemma arose.
Scruples of eating part of sacrifices were absolutely unintelligible,
except as insults to Ephesus. To deny the existence of Diana had no
meaning in the ears of an Ephesian. All that he did understand was, that
if you happened to be a hater of Ephesus, you must hate the guardian
deity of Ephesus. And the sole inference he could collect from your
refusing to eat what had been hallowed to Diana was--that you hated
Ephesus. The dilemma, therefore, was this: either grant a toleration of
this practice, or else farewell to all amicable intercourse for the Jews
with the citizens. In fact, it was to proclaim open war if this
concession were refused. A scruple of conscience might have been allowed
for, but a scruple of this nature could find no allowance in any Pagan
city whatever. Moreover, it had really no foundation. The truth is far
otherwise than that Pagan deities were dreams. Far from it. They were as
real as any other beings. The accommodation, therefore, which St. Paul
most wisely granted was--to eat socially, without regard to any ceremony
through which the food might have passed. So long as the Judaizing
Christian was no party to the religious ceremonies, he was free of all
participation in idolatry. Since if the mere open operation of a Pagan
process could transform into the character of an accomplice one who with
no assenting heart ate of the food, in that case Christ Himself might by
possibility have shared in an idolatrous banquet, and we Christians at
this day in the East Indies might for months together become unconscious
accomplices in the foul idolatries of the Buddhist and Brahminical
superstitions.

But so essentially were the convivial banquets of the Pagans interwoven
with their religious rites, so essentially was a great dinner a great
offering to the Gods, and _vice versâ_--a great offering to the Gods a
great dinner--that the very ministers and chief agents in religion were
at first the same. Cocus, or [Greek: mageirost], was the very same
person as the Pope, or presiding arbiter in succession to a Pope. 'Sunt
eadem,' says Casaubon, 'Cocus et Pope.' And of this a most striking
example is yet extant in Athenæus. From the correspondence which for
many centuries was extant between Alexander the Great, when embarked
upon his great expeditions, and his royal mother Olympias, who remained
in Macedon, was one from which we have an extract even at this day,
where he, as we learn from the letter quoted, had been urging his mother
to purchase for him a good cook. And what was made the test supreme of
his skill? Why, this, that he should be [Greek: thysihôn hempeirost], an
artist able to dress a sacrificial banquet. What he meant is this: I do
not want an ordinary cook, who might be equal to the preparation of a
plain (or, what is the same thing, secular) dinner, but a person
qualified or competent to take charge of a hecatomb dinner. His mother's
reply addresses itself to that one point only: [Greek: Peligua ton
mageiron labe hapd thêst mêtrost], which is in effect: 'A cook is it
that you want? Why, then, you cannot do better than take mine. The man
is a reliable table of sacrifices; he knows the whole ritual of those
great official and sacred dinners given by the late king, your father.
He is acquainted with the whole _cuisine_ of the more mysterious
religions, the Orgiacs' (probably from the neighbouring Thrace), 'and
all the great ceremonies and observances practised at Olympia, and even
what you may eat on the great St. Leger Day. So don't lose sight of the
arrangement, but take the man as a present, from me, your affectionate
mother, and be sure to send off an express for him at your earliest
convenience.'

That which the tradition of the people is to the truth of facts--that is
a _mythus_ to the reasonable origin of things. [Transcriber's Note: three
dots in a vertical line above a tiny circle] These objects to an eye at
[Transcriber's Note: low tiny circle] might all melt into one another, as
stars are confluent which modern astronomy has prismatically split. Says
Rennell, as a reason for a Mahometan origin of a canal through Cairo,
such is the tradition of the people. But we see amongst ourselves how
great works are ascribed to the devil or to the Romans by antiquarians.
In Rennell we see the effects of synthesis. He throws back his
observations, like a woman threading a series of needles or a shuttle
running through a series of rings, through a succession of Egyptian
canals (p. 478), showing the real action of the case, that a tendency
existed to this. And, by the way, here comes another strong illustration
of the popular adulterations. They in our country confound the 'Romans,'
a vulgar expression for the Roman Catholics, with the ancient national
people of Rome. Here one element of a _mythus_ B has melted into the
_mythus_ X, and in far-distant times might be very perplexing to
antiquarians, when the popular tradition was too old for them to _see_
the point of juncture where the alien stream had fallen in.

Then, again, not only ignorance, but love, combines to adulterate the
tradition. Every man wishes to give his own country an interest in
anything great. What an effort has been made to suck Sir T. R. back into
Scotland!

Thus, it is too difficult without a motive to hold apart vast distances
_or_ intervals that lie in a field which has all gathered into a blue
haze. Stars, divided by millions of miles, collapse into each other. So
_mythi_: and then comes the perplexity--the entanglement. Then come
also, from lacunæ arising in these interwelded stories, temptations to
falsehood. By the way, even the recent tale of Astyages seems to have
been pieced: the difficulty was to find a motive for Cyrus, reputed a
good man, to make war on his grandfather. Kill him he might by accident.
But the dream required that he should dethrone his grandfather.
Accordingly the dreadful story is devised; but why should Cyrus adopt
the injuries of a nobleman who, if all were true, had only saved himself
by accident?

Impossible as it would seem to transmute Socrates into a _mythus_,
considering the broad daylight which then rested upon Athenian history,
and the inextricable way in which Socrates is entangled in that history
(although we have all seen many a Scriptural personage so transmuted
under far less colourable pretenses or advantages), still it is evident
that the mediæval schoolmen _did_ practically treat Socrates as
something of that sort--as a mythical, symbolic, or representative man.
Socrates is the eternal burthen of their quillets, quodlibets, problems,
syllogisms; for them he is the Ulysses of the Odyssey, that
much-suffering man; or, to speak more adequately, for _them_ he is the
John Doe and the Richard Roe of English law, whose feuds have tormented
the earth and incensed the heavens through a cycle of uncounted
centuries, and must have given a bad character of our planet on its
English side. To such an extent was this pushed, that many of the
scholastic writers became wearied of enunciating or writing his name,
and, anticipating the occasional fashion of _My lud_ and _Your ludship_
at our English Bar, or of _Hocus Pocus_ as an abbreviation of pure
weariness for _Hoc est Corpus_, they called him not _Socrates_, but
_Sortes_. Now, whence, let me ask, was this custom derived? As to Doe
and Roe, who or what first set them by the ears together is now probably
past all discovery. But as to _Sortes_, that he was a mere contraction
for _Socrates_ is proved in the same way that _Mob_ is shown to have
been a brief way of writing _Mobile vulgus_, viz., that by Bishop
Stillingfleet in particular the two forms, _Mob_ and _Mobile vulgus_ are
used interchangeably and indifferently through several pages
consecutively--just as _Canter_ and _Canterbury gallop_, of which the
one was at first the mere shorthand expression of the other, were at one
period interchanged, and for the same reason. The abbreviated form wore
the air of plebeian slang at its first introduction, but its convenience
favoured it: soon it became reconciled to the ear, then it ceased to be
slang, and finally the original form, ceasing to have any apparent
advantage of propriety or elegance, dropped into total disuse. _Sortes_,
it is a clear case, inherited from Socrates his distressing post of
target-general for the arrows of disputatious Christendom. But how came
Socrates by that distinction? I cannot have a doubt that it was strength
of tradition that imputed such a use of the Socratic name and character
to Plato. The reader must remember that, although Socrates was no
_mythus_, and least of all could be such, to his own leading disciple,
that was no reason why he should not be treated as a _mythus_. In Wales,
some nine or ten years ago, _Rebecca_, as the mysterious and masqued
redresser of public wrongs, was rapidly passing into a _mythical_
expression for that universal character of Rhadamanthian avenger or
vindicator. So of Captain Rock, in Ireland. So of Elias amongst the Jews
(_when Elias shall come_), as the sublime, mysterious, and in some
degree pathetic expression for a great teacher lurking amongst the
dreadful mists.

You read in the Hebrew Scriptures of a man who had thirty sons, all of
whom 'rode on white asses'; the riding on white asses is a circumstance
that expresses their high rank or distinction--that all were princes. In
Syria, as in Greece and almost everywhere, white was the regal symbolic
colour. And any mode of equitation, from the far inferior wealth of
ancient times, implied wealth. Mules or asses, besides that they were so
far superior a race in Syria no less than in Persia, to furnish a
favourite designation for a warlike hero, could much more conveniently
be used on the wretched roads, as yet found everywhere, until the Romans
began to treat road-making as a regular business of military pioneering.
In this case, therefore, there were thirty sons of one man, and all
provided with princely establishments. Consequently, to have thirty sons
at all was somewhat surprising, and possible only in a land of polygamy;
but to keep none back in obscurity (as was done in cases where the funds
of the family would not allow of giving to each his separate
establishment) argued a condition of unusual opulence. That it was
surprising is very true. But as therefore involving any argument against
its truth, the writer would justly deny by pleading--for that very
reason, _because_ it was surprising, did I tell the story. In a train of
1,500 years naturally there must happen many wonderful things, both as
to events and persons. Were these crowded together in time or locally,
these indeed we should incredulously reject. But when we understand the
vast remoteness from each other in time or in place, we freely admit the
tendency lies the other way; the wonder would be if there were _not_
many coincidences that each for itself separately might be looked upon
as strange. And as the surgeon had set himself to collect certain cases
for the very reason that they were so unaccountably fatal, with a
purpose therefore of including all that did _not_ terminate fatally, so
we should remember that generally historians (although less so if a
Jewish historian, because he had a far nobler chain of wonders to
record) do not feel themselves open to the objection of romancing if
they report something out of the ordinary track, since exactly that sort
of matter is their object, and it cannot but be found in a considerable
proportion when their course travels over a vast range of successive
generations. It would be a marvellous thing indeed if every one of five
hundred men whom an author had chosen to record biographically should
have for his baptismal name--Francis. But if you found that this was the
very reason for his admitting the man into his series, that, however
strange a reason, it had in fact governed him in selecting his subjects,
you would no longer see anything to startle your belief.

But let me give an interesting case partly illustrating this principle.
Once I was present on an occasion where, of two young men, one very
young and very clever was suggesting infidel scruples, and the other, so
much older as to be entering on a professional career with considerable
distinction, was on the very point of drinking-in all that his companion
urged as so much weighty objection that could not be answered. The
younger man (in fact, a boy) had just used a passage from the Bible, in
which one of the circumstances was--that the Jewish army consisted of
120,000 men. 'Now,' said he, 'knowing as we all do the enormity of such
a force as a peace establishment, even for mighty empires like England,
how perfectly like a fairy-tale or an Arabian Nights' entertainment does
it sound to hear of such monstrous armaments in a little country like
Judæa, equal, perhaps, to the twelve counties of Wales!' This was
addressed to myself, and I could see by the whole expression of the
young physician that his condition was exactly this--his studies had
been purely professional; he made himself a king, because (having
happened to hurt his leg) he wore white _fasciæ_ about his thigh. He
knew little or nothing of Scriptural records; he had not read at all
upon this subject; quite as little had he thought, and, unfortunately,
his conversation had lain amongst clever chemists and naturalists, who
had a prejudgment in the case that all the ability and free power of
mind ran into the channel of scepticism; that only people situated as
most women are should acquiesce in the faith or politics of their
fathers or predecessors, or could believe much of the Scriptures, except
those who were slow to examine for themselves; but that multitudes
pretended to believe upon some interested motive. This was precisely
the situation of the young physician himself--he listened with manifest
interest, checked himself when going to speak; he knew the danger of
being reputed an infidel, and he had no temper for martyrdom, as his
whole gesture and manner, by its tendency, showed what was passing in
his mind. 'Yes, X is right, manifestly right, and every rational view
from our modern standard of good sense and reflective political economy
tends to the same conclusion. By the reflex light of political economy
we know even at this hour much as to the condition of ancient lands like
Palestine, Athens, etc., quite unrevealed to the wisest men amongst
them. But for me, who am entering on a critical walk of social life, I
shall need every aid from advantageous impression in favour of my
religious belief, so I cannot in prudence speak, for I shall speak too
warmly, and I forbear.'

What I replied, and in that instance usefully replied--for it sufficed
to check one who was gravitating downwards to infidelity, and likely to
settle there for ever if he once reached that point--was in substance
this:

Firstly, that the plea, with regard to the numbers as most
extraordinary, was so far from affecting the credibility of the
statement disadvantageously, that on that ground, agreeably to the logic
I have so scantily expounded, this very feature in the case was what
partly engaged the notice of the Scriptural writer. It _was_ a great
army for so little a nation. And _therefore_, would the writer say,
_therefore_ in print I record it.

Secondly, that we must not, however, be misled by the narrow limits, the
Welsh limits, to suppose a Welsh population. For that whilst the twelve
counties of Wales do not _now_ yield above half-a-million of people,
Palestine had pretty certainly a number fluctuating between four and six
millions.

Thirdly, that the great consideration of this was the stage in the
expansion of society at which the Hebrew nation then stood, and the
sublime interest--sublime enough to them, though far from comprehending
the solemn freight of hopes confided to themselves--which they
consciously defended. It was an age in which no pay was given to the
soldier. Now, when the soldier constitutes a separate profession, with
the regular pay he undertakes the regular danger and hardships. There is
no motive for giving the pay and the rations but precisely that he
_does_ so undertake. But when no pay at all is allowed out of any common
fund, it will never be endured by the justice of the whole society or by
an individual member that he, the individual, as one insulated
stake-holder, having no greater interest embarked than others, should
undertake the danger or the labour of warfare for the whole. And two
inferences arise upon having armies so immense:

First, that they were a militia, or more properly not even that, but a
Landwehr--that is, a _posse comitatus_, the whole martial strength of
the people (one in four), drawn out and slightly trained to meet a
danger, which in those times was always a passing cloud. Regular and
successive campaigns were unknown; the enemy, whoever he might be, could
as little support a regular army as the people of Palestine.
Consequently, all these enemies would have to disperse hastily to their
reaping and mowing, just as we may observe the Jews do under Joshua. It
required, therefore, no long absence from home. It was but a march, but
a waiting for opportunity, watching for a favourable day--sunshine or
cloud, the rising or subsiding of a river, the wind in the enemy's face,
or an ambush skilfully posted. All was then ready; the signal was given,
a great battle ensued, and by sunset of one anxious day all was over in
one way or another. Upon this position of circumstances there was
neither any fair dispensation from personal service (except where
citizens' scruples interfered), nor any motive for wishing it. On the
contrary, by a very few days' service, a stigma, not for the individual
only, but for his house and kin, would be evaded for ages of having
treacherously forsaken the commonwealth in agony. And the preference for
a fighting station would be too eager instead of too backward. It would
become often requisite to do what it is evident the Jews in reality
did--to make successive sifting and winnowing from the service troops,
at every stage throwing out upon severer principles of examination those
who seemed least able to face a trying crisis, whilst honourable posts
of no great dependency would be assigned to those rejected, as modes of
soothing their offended pride. This in the case of a great danger; but
in the case of an ordinary danger there is no doubt that many vicarious
arrangements would exist by way of evading so injurious a movement as
that of the whole fighting population. Either the ordinary watch and
ward, in that section which happened to be locally threatened--as, for
instance, by invasion on one side from Edom or Moab, on another side
from the Canaanites or Philistines--would undertake the case as one
which had fallen to them by allotment of Providence; or that section
whose service happened to be due for the month, without local regards,
would face the exigency. But in any great national danger, under that
stage of society which the Jews had reached between Moses and
David--that stage when fighting is no separate professional duty, that
stage when such things are announced by there being no military pay--not
the army which is so large as 120,000 men, but the army which is so
small, requires to be explained.[8]

Secondly, the other inference from the phenomenon of no military pay,
and therefore no separate fighting profession, is this--that foreign
war, war of aggression, war for booty, war for martial glory, is quite
unknown. Now, all rules of political economy, applied to the maintenance
of armies, must of course contemplate a regular trade of war pursued
with those objects, and not a domestic war for beating off an attack
upon hearths and altars. Such a war only, be it observed, could be
lawfully entertained by the Jewish people. Mahomet, when he stole all
his great ideas from the Mosaic and Christian revelations, found it
inevitable to add one principle unknown to either: this was a religious
motive for perpetual war of aggression, and such a principle he
discovered in the imaginary duty of summary proselytism. No instruction
was required. It was sufficient for the convert that, with or without
sincerity, under terror of a sword at his throat, he spoke the words
aloud which disowned all other faith than in Allah and Mahomet his
prophet. It was sufficient for the soldier that he heard of a nation
denying or ignoring Mahomet, to justify any atrocity of invasive
warfare. But the Jews had no such commission--a proselyte needed more
evidences of assent than simply to bawl out a short formula of words,
and he who refused to become a proselyte was no object of persecution.
Some nations have forced their languages upon others as badges of
servitude. But the Romans were so far from treating _their_ language in
this way, that they compelled barbarous nations on their frontier to pay
for a license to use the Latin tongue. And with much more reason did the
Jews, instead of wishing to obtrude their sublime religion upon
foreigners, expect that all who valued it should manifest their value by
coming to Jerusalem, by seeking instruction from the doctors of the law,
and by worshipping in the outer court of the Temple.

Such was the prodigious state of separation from a Mahometan principle
of fanatical proselytism in which the Jews were placed from the very
first. One small district only was to be cleared of its ancient
idolatrous, and probably desperately demoralized, tribes. Even this
purification it was not intended should be instant; and upon the
following reason, partly unveiled by God and partly left to an
integration, viz., that in the case of so sudden a desolation the wild
beasts and noxious serpents would have encroached too much on the human
population. So much is expressed, and probably the sequel foreseen was,
that the Jews would have lapsed into a wild hunting race, and have
outworn that ceremonial propensity which fitted them for a civil life,
which formed them into a hive in which the great work of God in Shiloh,
His probationary Temple or His glorious Temple and service at Jerusalem,
operated as the mysterious instinct of a queen bee, to compress and
organize the whole society into a cohesion like this of life. Here,
perhaps, lay the reason for not allowing of any sudden summary
extirpation, even for the idolatrous tribes; whilst, upon a second
principle, it was never meant that this extirpation should be complete.
Snares and temptations were not to be too thickly sown--in that case the
restless Jew would be too severely tried; but neither were they to be
utterly withdrawn--in that case his faith would undergo no probation.
Even upon this small domestic scale, therefore, it appears that
aggressive warfare was limited both for interest and for time. First, it
was not to be too complete; second, even for this incompleteness it was
not to be concentrated within a short time. It was both to be narrow and
to be gradual. By very necessity, therefore, of its original appointment
this part of the national economy, this small system of aggressive
warfare, could not provide a reason for a military profession. But all
other wars of aggression, wars operating upon foreign objects, had no
allowance, no motive, no colourable plea; for the attacks upon Edom,
Midian, Moab, were mere acts of retaliation, and, strictly speaking, not
aggressive at all, but parts of defensive warfare. Consequently there
remained no permanent case of war under Divine allowance that could ever
justify the establishment of a military caste; for the civil wars of the
Jews either grew out of some one intolerable crime taken up, adopted,
and wickedly defended by a whole tribe (as in the case of that horrible
atrocity committed by a few Benjamites, and then adopted by the whole
tribe), in which case a bloody exterminating war under God's sanction
succeeded and rapidly drew to a close, or else grew out of the ruinous
schism between the ten tribes and the two seated in or about Jerusalem.
And as this schism had no countenance from God, still less could the
wars which followed it. So that what belligerent state remains that
could have been contemplated or provided for in the original Mosaic
theory of their constitution? Clearly none at all, except the one sole
case of a foreign invasion. But as this, if in any national strength,
struck at the very existence of the people, and at their holy citadel in
Shiloh or in Jerusalem, it called out the whole military strength to the
last man of the Hebrew people. Consequently in any case, when the armies
could tend at all to great numerical amount, they must tend to an
excessive amount. And, so far from being a difficult problem to solve in
the 120,000 men, the true difficulty would lie the other way, to account
for its being so much reduced.

It seems to me highly probable that the offence of David in numbering
the people, which ultimately was the occasion of fixing the site for the
Temple of Jerusalem, pointed to this remarkable military position of the
Jewish people--a position forbidding all fixed military institutions,
and which yet David was probably contemplating in that very _census_.
Simply to number the people could not have been a crime, nor could it be
any desideratum for David; because we are too often told of the muster
rolls for the whole nation, and for each particular tribe, to feel any
room for doubt that the reports on this point were constantly corrected,
brought under review of the governing elders, councils, judges, princes,
or king, according to the historical circumstances, so that the need and
the criminality of such a _census_ would vanish at the same moment. But
this was not the _census_ ordered by David. He wanted a more specific
return, probably of the particular wealth and nature of the employment
pursued by each individual family, so that upon this return he might
ground a permanent military organization for the people; and such an
organization would have thoroughly revolutionized the character of the
population, as well as drawn them into foreign wars and alliances.

It is painful to think that many amiable and really candid minds in
search of truth are laid hold of by some plausible argument, as in this
case the young physician, by a topic of political economy, when a local
examination of the argument would altogether change its bearing. This
argument, popularly enforced, seemed to imply the impossibility of
supporting a large force when there were no public funds but such as ran
towards the support of the Levites and the majestic service of the
altar. But the confusion arises from the double sense of the word
'army,' as a machine ordinarily disposable for all foreign objects
indifferently, and one which in Judæa exclusively could be applied only
to such a service as must in its own nature be sudden, brief, and always
tending to a decisive catastrophe.

And that this was the true form of the crime, not only circumstances
lead me to suspect, but especially the remarkable demur of Joab, who in
his respectful remonstrance said in effect that, when the whole strength
of the nation was known in sum--meaning from the ordinary state
returns--what need was there to search more inquisitively into the
special details? Where all were ready to fight cheerfully, why seek for
separate _minutiæ_ as to each particular class? Those general returns
had regard only to the ordinary _causa belli_--a hostile invasion. And,
then, all nations alike, rude or refined, have gone upon the same
general outline of computation--that, subtracting the females from the
males, this, in a gross general way, would always bisect the total
return of the population. And, then, to make a second bisection of the
male half would subtract one quarter from the entire people as too young
or too old, or otherwise as too infirm for warlike labours, leaving
precisely one quarter of the nation--every fourth head--as available for
war. This process for David's case would have yielded perhaps about
1,100,000 fighting men throughout Palestine. But this unwieldy
_pospolite_ was far from meeting David's secret anxieties. He had
remarked the fickle and insurrectionary state of the people. Even
against himself how easy had it been found to organize a sudden
rebellion, and to conceal it so prosperously that he and his whole court
saved themselves from capture only by a few hours' start of the enemy,
and through the enemy's want of cavalry. This danger meantime having
vanished, it might be possible that for David personally no other great
conspiracy should disturb his seat upon the throne. None of David's sons
approached to Absalom in popularity; and yet the subsequent attempt of
Adonijah showed that the revolutionary temper was still awake in that
quarter. But what David feared, in a further-looking spirit, was the
tenure by which his immediate descendants would maintain their title.
The danger was this: over and above the want of any principle for
regulating the succession, and this want operating in a state of things
far less determined than amongst monogamous nations--one son pleading
his priority of birth; another, perhaps, his mother's higher rank, a
third pleading his very juniority, inasmuch as this brought him within
the description of _porphyrogeniture_, or royal birth, which is often
felt as transcendent as _primogeniture_--even the people, apart from the
several pretenders to the throne, would create separate interests as
grounds for insurrection or for intestine feuds. There seems good reason
to think that already the ten tribes, Israel as opposed to Judah, looked
upon the more favoured and royal tribe of Judah, with their
supplementary section of Benjamin, as unduly favoured in the national
economy. Secretly there is little doubt that they murmured even against
God for ranking this powerful tribe as the prerogative tribe. The
jealousy had evidently risen to a great height; it was suppressed by the
vigilant and strong government of Solomon; but at the outset of his
son's reign it exploded at once, and the Scriptural account of the case
shows that it proceeded upon old grievances. The boyish rashness of
Rehoboam might exasperate the leaders, and precipitate the issue; but
very clearly all had been prepared for a revolt. And I would remark that
by the 'young men' of Rehoboam are undoubtedly meant the soldiers--the
body-guards whom the Jewish kings now retained as an element of royal
pomp. This is the invariable use of the term in the East. Even in
Josephus the term for the military by profession is generally 'the young
men'; whilst 'the elders' mean the councilors of state. David saw
enough of the popular spirit to be satisfied that there was no political
reliance on the permanence of the dynasty; and even at home there was an
internal source of weakness. The tribe of Benjamin were mortified and
incensed at the deposition of Saul's family and the bloody proscription
of that family adopted by David. One only, a grandson of Saul, he had
spared out of love to his friend Jonathan. This was Mephibo-sheth; but
he was incapacitated for the throne by lameness. And how deep the
resentment was amongst the Benjamites is evident from the insulting
advantage taken of his despondency in the day of distress by Shimei. For
Shimei had no motive for the act of coming to the roadside and cursing
the king beyond his attachment to the house of Saul. Humanly speaking,
David's prospect of propagating his own dynasty was but small. On the
other hand, God had promised him _His_ support. And hence it was that
his crime arose, viz., upon his infidelity, in seeking to secure the
throne by a mere human arrangement in the first place; secondly, by such
an arrangement as must disorganize the existing theocratic system of the
Jewish people. Upon this crime followed his chastisement in a sudden
pestilence. And it is remarkable in how significant a manner God
manifested the nature of the trespass, and the particular course through
which He had meant originally, and _did_ still mean, to counteract the
worst issue of David's apprehensions. It happened that the angel of the
pestilence halted at the threshing-floor of Araunah; and precisely that
spot did God by dreams to David indicate as the site of the glorious
Temple. Thus it seemed as though in so many words God had declared: 'Now
that all is over, your crime and its punishment, understand that your
fears were vain. I will continue the throne in your house longer than
your anxieties can personally pursue its descent. And with regard to the
terrors from Israel, although this event of a great schism is inevitable
and essential to My councils, yet I will not allow it to operate for the
extinction of your house. And that very Temple, in that very place where
My angel was commissioned to pause, shall be one great means and one
great pledge to you of My decree in favour of your posterity. For this
house, as a common sanctuary to all Jewish blood, shall create a
perpetual interest in behalf of Judah amongst the other tribes, even
when making war upon Jerusalem.' Witness if it were but that one case
where 200,000 captives of Judah were restored without ransom, were
clothed completely, were fed, by the very men who had just massacred
their fighting relatives.

The argument for the separation and distinct current of the Jews,
flowing as they pretend of the river Rhone through the Lake of
Geneva--never mixing its waters with those which surround it--has been
by some infidel writers defeated and evaded by one word; and here, as
everywhere else, an unwise teacher will seek to hide the answer. Yet how
infinitely better to state it fully, and then show that the evasion has
no form at all; but, on the contrary, powerfully argues the
inconsistency and incapacity of those who urge it. For instance, I
remember Boulanger, a French infidel, whose work was duly translated by
a Scotchman, answers it thus: What is there miraculous in all this? he
demands. Listen to me, and I will show you in two minutes that it rests
upon mere show and pure delusion. How is it, why is it, that the Jews
have remained a separate people? Simply from their usages, in the first
place; but, secondly, still more from the fact that these usages, which
with other peoples exist also in some representative shape, with _them_
modify themselves, shift, alter, adapt themselves to the climate or to
the humour or accidents of life amongst those amidst whom chance has
thrown them; whereas amongst the Jews every custom, the most trivial, is
also part of their legislation; and their legislation is also their
religion. (Boulanger, by the way, is far from expressing that objection
so clearly as I have here done; but this is his drift and purpose, so
far as he knew how to express it.) Take any other people--Isaurians,
Athenians, Romans, Corinthians--doubtless all these and many others have
transmitted their blood down to our ages, and are now living amongst us
by representation. But why do we not perceive this? Why do the Athenians
seem to have perished utterly? Simply for this reason: they were a
plastic, yielding, unobstinate race. An Athenian lived in a port of
Italy, married an Italian woman; thence threw out lines of descent to
Milan, thence to Paris; and because his Attic usages were all local,
epichorial, and tied to a particular mythology which has given way, or
to a superstition which is defunct, or to a patriotic remembrance which
has vanished with the land and the sympathy that supported it; hence,
and upon other similar arguments, the Athenian has long since melted
into the mass with which he was intermixed; he was a unit attached to a
vast overpowering number from another source, and into that number he
has long since been absorbed; he was a drop in a vast ocean, and long
ago he has been confounded with the waters that did not differ, except
numerically, from his own. But the Jews are an obstinate, bigoted
people; and they have maintained their separation, not by any overruling
or coercing miracle, but in a way perfectly obvious and palpable to
themselves--obvious by its operation, obvious in its remedy. They would
not resign their customs. Upon these ordinances, positive and negative,
commanding and forbidding many peculiar rites, consecrating and
desecrating many common esculent articles, these Jews have laid the
stress and emphasis of religion. They would not resign them; they did
not expect others to adopt them--not in any case; _à fortiori_ not from
a degraded people. And hence, not by any mysterious operation of
Providential control, arose their separation, their resolute refusal to
blend with other races.

This is the infidel's attempt to rebut, to defeat, utterly to confound,
the argumentative force of this most astonishing amongst all historical
pictures that the planet presents.

The following is the answer:

It is forgotten that along with the Jews there is another people
concerned as illustrations of the same prophetic fatality--of that same
inevitable eye, that same perspective of vision, which belonged to those
whose eyes God had opened. The Arabs, as children of a common ancestor,
ought not to be forgotten in this sentence upon their brother nation.
They through Ishmael, the Jews through Isaac, and more immediately
through Israel the son of Isaac, were two diverging branches of one
original stem; and to both was pronounced a corresponding doom--a
sentence which argued in both a principle of duration and
self-propagation, that is memorable in any race. The children of Ishmael
are the Arabs of the desert. Their destiny as a roving robber nation,
and liable to all men's hands, as they indifferently levied spoil on
all, was early pronounced. And here, again, we see at once how it will
be evaded: it is the desert, it is the climate, it is the solemnity of
that unchanging basis, which will secure the unchanging life of its
children. But it is remarkable enough that Gibbon and other infidels,
kicking violently against this standing miracle (because, if not so in
itself, yet, according to Bishop Butler's just explanation concerning
miraculous _per de_-_rivationem_ as recording a miraculous power of
vision), have by oscillation clung to the fixture of basis, and rejected
it; for now Gibbon denies that the Arabs have held this constant tenor
of life; they have changed it, he asserts, in large and notorious cases.
Well, then, if they have, then at once falls to the ground this alleged
overruling coercion _a priori_ of the climate and the desert. Climate
and desert do not necessarily coerce them, if in large and notorious
cases they have failed to do so. So feels Gibbon; and, by an instinct of
timidity, back he flies to the previous evasion--to the natural
controlling power of climate and soil, admitting the Scriptural fact,
but seeking for it an unscriptural ground, as before he had flown in
over-precipitate anxiety to the denial of the Scriptural fact, but in
that denial involving a withdrawal of the unscriptural ground.

The sceptics in that instance show their secret sense of a preference
from the distracted eagerness with which they fly backwards and
forwardwise between two reciprocally hostile evasions.

The answer I reserve, and meantime I remark:

Secondly, that, supposing this answer to have any force, still it meets
only one moiety of the Scriptural fatality; viz., the dispersion of the
Jews--the fact that, let them be gathered in what numbers they might,
let them even be concentrated by millions, therefore in the literal
sense _not_ dispersed, yet in the political sense universally
understood, they would be dispersed, because never, in no instance,
rising to be a people, _sui juris_, a nation, a distinct community,
known to the public law of Europe as having the rights of peace and war,
but always a mere accident and vagrant excess amongst nations, not
having the bare rights of citizenship; so far from being a nation, not
being an acknowledged member of any nation. This exquisite
dispersion--not ethnographic only, but political--is that half of the
Scriptural malediction which the Boulanger answer attempts to meet; but
the other half--that they should be 'a byword, an astonishment,'
etc.--is entirely blinked. Had the work even prospered, it would still
have to recommence. The Armenians are dispersed through all Eastern
lands, so are the Arabs; even the descendants of Ali are found severed
from their natal soil; but they are not therefore dispersed: they have
endured no general indignities.

Thirdly, it does not meet the fact of the Jewish _existence_ in any
shape, whether as a distinct or an amalgamated people. There is no doubt
that many races of men, as of brute animals, have been utterly
extinguished. In cases such as those of the Emim, or Rethinim, a race
distinguished by peculiar size, so as to be monstrous in comparison with
other men, this extinction could more readily be realized; or in the
case of a nation marked, as Herodotus records, by a slighter texture of
scale, the extinction might be ascertained by the physiologist; but no
doubt it has often occurred, precisely as a family is extinguished, or
as certain trees (for example, the true golden pippin) are observed to
die off, not by local influences only, but by a decay attacking the very
principle of their existence. Of many ancient races it is probable
enough that no blood directly traced from them could at this day be
searched by the eye of God. Families arise amongst the royal lineage of
Europe that suddenly, like a lamp fitfully glowing up just the moment
before it expires, throw off, as by some final effort, a numerous
generation of princes and princesses; then suddenly all contract as
rapidly into a single child, which perishing, the family is absolutely
extinct. And so must many nations have perished, and so must the Jews
have been pre-eminently exposed to perish, from the peculiar, fierce,
and almost immortal, persecutions which they have undergone, and the
horrid frenzies of excited mobs in cruel cities of which they have stood
the brunt.

It is true that Pilate could not be expected fully to comprehend an idea
which was yet new to man; Christ's words were beyond his depth. But,
still, his natural light would guide him thus far--that, although he had
never heard of any truth which rose to that distinction, still, if any
one class of truth should in future come to eclipse all other classes of
truth immeasurably, as regarded its practical results, as regarded some
dark dependency of human interests, in that case it would certainly
merit the distinctive name of 'The Truth.' The case in which such a
distinction would become reasonable and available was one utterly
unrealized to his experience, not even within the light of his
conjectures as to its special conditions; but, still, as a general
possibility it was conceivable to his understanding; though not
comprehensible, yet apprehensible. And in going on to the next great
question, to the inevitable question, 'What _is_ the truth?' Pilate had
no thought of jesting. Jesting was the last thing of which his
impassioned mood in that great hour was capable. Roman magistrates of
supreme rank were little disposed to jesting on the judgment-seat
amongst a refractory and dangerous people; and of Pilate in particular,
every word, every effort, every act, demonstrate that he was agitated
with new instincts and misgivings of some shadowy revelation opening
upon man, that his heart was convulsed with desponding anxiety in the
first place to save the man who appeared the depositary of this
revelation, but who, if, after all, only a sublime lunatic, was, at the
very least, innocent of all offence. It must have struck all close
observers of early Christianity how large a proportion of the new
converts lay amongst Roman officers, or (to speak more adequately)
amongst Romans of high rank, both men and women. And for that there was
high reason. In the advance of civilization, and in the corresponding
decay of idolatrous religions, there was fast arising a new growth of
cravings amongst men. Mythological and desperately immoral religions,
that spoke only to the blind sense of power, had been giving way through
the three previous centuries to a fearful extent. They had receded from
the higher natures of both Greece and Rome as the sea has locally
receded from many shores of the earth. Such natures were left 'miserably
bare'; the sense of dependency by any tie upon the invisible world, or
at least upon the supernatural world, had decayed, and unless this
painful void were filled up by some supplementary bond in the same
direction, a condition of practical atheism must take place, such as
could not but starve and impoverish in human nature those yearnings
after the infinite which are the pledges of all internal grandeur. But
this dependency could not be replaced by one of the same vicious nature.
Into any new dependency a new element must be introduced. The sense of
insufficiency would be renewed in triple strength if merely the old
relations of weakness to power, of art to greater art, of intellect to
higher intellect, of less to more within the same exact limits as to
kind of excellence, should be rehearsed under new names or improved
theogonies. Hitherto, no relation of man to divine or demoniac powers
had included the least particle or fraction or hint of any moral
element; nor was such an element possible in that dependency, for
profound reasons.

Before any canon was settled, many works had become current in Christian
circles whose origin was dubious. The traditions about them varied
locally. Some, it is alleged, that would really have been entitled to a
canonical place, had been lost by accident; to some, which still
survived, this place had been refused upon grounds that might not have
satisfied _us_ of this day, if we had the books and the grounds of
rejection before us; and, finally, others, it is urged, have obtained
this sacred distinction with no right to it. In particular, the Second
Epistle of St. Peter, the Second of St. Jude, the Epistle of St. James,
and the three of St. John, are denounced as supposititious in the
'Scaligerana.' But the writer before us is wrong in laying any stress on
the opinions there expressed. They bear the marks of conversational
haste and of Scaligeran audacity. What is the objection made, for
instance, to 'in quibus sunt mira, quæ non _videntur_ esse Apostolica'?
_That_ is itself more strange as a criticism than anything in the
epistles _can_ be for its doctrine. The only thing tending to a reason
for the summary treatment is that the Eastern Church does not
acknowledge them for canonical. But opinions quoted from _ana_ are
seldom of any authority; indeed, I have myself too frequently seen the
unfaithfulness of such reports. The reporter, as he cannot decently be
taking notes at the time of speaking, endeavours afterwards to recall
the most interesting passages by memory. He forgets the context; what
introduced--what followed to explain or modify the opinions. He supplies
a conjectural context of his own, and the result is a romance. But if
the reporter were even accurate, so much allowance must be made for the
license of conversation--its ardour, its hurry, and its frequent
playfulness--that when all these deductions are made, really not a
fraction remains that one can honestly carry to account. Besides, the
elder Scaliger was drunk pretty often, and Joe seems rather 'fresh' at
times.

Upon consideration, it may be as well to repeat what it is that Scaliger
is reported to have said:

'The Epistle of Jude is not _his_, as neither is that of James, nor the
_second_ of Peter, in all which are strange things that seem (seem--mark
that!) far enough from being Apostolical. The three Epistles of John are
not from John the Apostle. The second of Peter and Jude belong to a
later age. The Eastern Church does not own them, neither are they of
evangelical authority. They are unlearned, and offer no marks of Gospel
majesty. As regards their internal value, believe them I may say that I
do, but it is because they are in no ways hostile to _us_.'

Now, observe, the grounds of objection are purely æsthetical, except in
the single argument from the authority of the Eastern Church. What does
he mean by 'unlearned,' or wanting 'majesty,' or containing 'strange
things'? Were ever such vague puerilities collected into one short
paragraph? This is pure impertinence, and _Phil_. deserves to be
privately reprimanded for quoting such windy chaff without noting and
protesting it as colloquial. But what I wish the reader to mark--the
[Greek: tho hepimhythion]--is, that suppose the two Scaligers amongst
the Christian Fathers engaged in fixing the canon: greater learning you
cannot have; neither was there, to a dead certainty, one tenth part as
much amongst the canon-settlers. Yet all this marvellous learning fumes
away in boyish impertinence. It confounds itself. And every Christian
says, Oh, take away this superfluous weight of erudition, that, being so
rare a thing, cannot be wanted in the broad highways of religion. What
we _do_ want is humility, docility, reverence for God, and love for man.
These are sown broadcast amongst human hearts. Now, these apply
themselves to the _sense_ of Scripture, not to its grammatical niceties.
But if so, even that case shows indirectly how little could depend upon
the mere verbal attire of the Bible, when the chief masters of verbal
science were so ready to go astray--riding on the billows so imperfectly
moored. In the _ideas_ of Scripture lies its eternal anchorage, not in
its perishable words, which are shifting for ever like quicksands, as
the Bible passes by translation successively into every spoken language
of the earth.

What then?--'What then?' retorts the angry reader after all this, 'why
then, perhaps, there may be a screw loose in the Bible.' True, there
may, and what is more, some very great scholars take upon them to assert
that there is. Yet, still, what then? The two possible errors open to
the Fathers of our canon, to the men upon whom rested the weighty task
of saying to all mankind what should be Bible, and what should be _not_
Bible, of making and limiting that mighty world, are--that they may
have done that which they ought _not_ to have done, and, secondly, left
undone that which they ought to have done. They may have admitted
writers whom they ought to have excluded; and they may have excluded
writers whom they ought to have admitted. This is the extent of their
possible offences, and they are supposed by some critics to have
committed both. But suppose that they _have_, still I say--what then?
What is the nature of the wrong done to us by the worst mistake ascribed
to them? Let us consider. It is supposed by some scholars that we have
in the New Testament as it now stands a work written by Apollos, viz.,
the Epistle to the Romans. Yet, if so, the error amounts only to a
misnomer. On the other hand, there are Epistles on which has been
charged the same error in relation to the name of the author, and the
more important error of thoughts unbecoming to a Christian in authority:
for instance, the Epistle of St. James. This charge was chiefly urged by
a very intemperate man, and in a very intemperate style. I notice it as
being a case which _Phil_. has noticed. But _Phil_. merits a gentle rap
on his knuckles for the inconsideration with which he has cited a charge
made and reported with so much levity. He quotes it from the
'Scaligerana.' Now, what right upon such a subject has any man to quote
such an authority? The reasons against listening with much attention to
the 'Scaligerana' are these:

First, the Scaligers, both father and son, were the two most impudent
men that ever walked the planet. I should be loath to say so ill-natured
a thing as that their impudence was equal to their learning, because
that forces every man to say, 'Ah, then, what impudent fellows they
must have been!' It is kinder and juster to say that their learning was
at least equal to their impudence, for _that_ will force every man to
exclaim, 'Ah, if so, what prodigies of learning they must have been!'
Yes, they were--absolute monsters of learning, learned monsters. But as
much learning often makes men mad, still more frequently it makes them
furious for assault and battery; to use the American phrase, they grow
'wolfy about the shoulders,' from a periodical itchiness for fighting.
Other men being shy of attacking the Scaligers, it was no fault of
theirs, you know, but a necessity, to attack other men--unless you
expected them to have no fighting at all. It was always a reason with
_them_ for trying a fall with a writer, if they doubted much whether
they had any excuse for hanging a quarrel on.

Secondly, all _ana_ whatever are bad authorities. Supposing the thing
really said, we are to remember the huge privilege of conversation, how
immeasurable is that! You yourself, reader, I presume, when talking,
will say more in an hour than you will stand to in a month. I'm sure _I_
do. When the reins are put into my hands I stick at nothing--headlong I
drive like a lunatic, until the very room in which we are talking, with
all that it inherits, seems to spin round with absolute vertigo at the
extravagances I utter.

Thirdly, but again, was the thing really said? For, as another censure
upon the whole library of _ana_, I can assert--that, if the license of
conversation is enormous, to that people who inhale that gas of
colloquial fermentation seldom mean much above one part in sixty of what
they say, on the other hand the license of reporters is far greater. To
forget the circumstances under which a thing was said is to alter the
thing, to have lost the context, the particular remark in which your
own originated, the mitigations of a harsh sentiment from playfulness of
manner; in short, to drop the _setting_ of the thoughts is oftentimes to
falsify the tendency and value of those thoughts.

A new paper on Murder as a Fine Art might open thus: that on the model
of those Gentlemen Radicals who had voted a monument to Palmer, etc., it
was proposed to erect statues to such murderers as should by their
next-of-kin, or other person interested in their glory, make out a claim
either of superior atrocity, or, in equal atrocity, of superior
neatness, continuity of execution, perfect preparation or felicitous
originality, smoothness or _curiosa felicitas_ (elaborate felicity). The
men who murdered the cat, as we read in the Newgate Calendar, were good,
but Williams better who murdered the baby. And perhaps (but the hellish
felicity of the last act makes us demur) Fielding was superior. For you
never hear of a fire swallowing up a fire, or a rain stopping a deluge
(for this would be a reign of Kilkenny cats); but what fire, deluge, or
Kilkenny cats could not do, Fielding proposed, viz., to murder the
murderers, to become himself the Nemesis. Fielding was the murderer of
murderers in a double sense--rhetorical and literal. But that was, after
all, a small matter compared with the fine art of the man calling
himself Outis, on which for a moment we must dwell. Outis--so at all
events he was called, but doubtless he indulged in many aliases--at
Nottingham joined vehemently and sincerely, as it seemed, in pursuit of
a wretch taxed with having murdered, twelve years previously, a wife and
two children at Halifax, which wretch (when all the depositions were
before the magistrate) turned out to be the aforesaid Mr. Outis. That
suggests a wide field of speculation and reference.[9]

Note the power of murderers as fine-art professors to make a new start,
to turn the corner, to retreat upon the road they have come, as though
it were new to them, and to make diversions that disarm suspicion. This
they owe to fortunate obscurity, which attests anew the wonderful
compensations of life; for celebrity and power combine to produce
drawbacks.

A foreigner who lands in Calcutta at an hour which nobody can name, and
endeavours to effect a sneaking entrance at the postern-gate[10] of the
governor-general's palace, _may_ be a decent man; but this we know, that
he has cut the towing-rope which bound his own boat to the great ark of
his country. It may be that, in leaving Paris or Naples, he was simply
cutting the connection with creditors who showed signs of _attachment_
not good for his health. But it may also be that he ran away by the
blaze of a burning inn, which he had fired in order to hide three
throats which he had cut, and nine purses which he had stolen. There is
no guarantee for such a man's character. Have we, then, no such
_vauriens_ at home? No, not in the classes standing favourably for
promotion. The privilege of safe criminality, not liable to exposure, is
limited to classes crowded together like leaves in Vallombrosa; for
_them_ to run away into some mighty city, Manchester or Glasgow, is to
commence life anew. They turn over a new leaf with a vengeance. Many are
the carpenters, bricklayers, bakers' apprentices, etc., who are now
living decently in Bristol, Newcastle, Hull, Liverpool, after marrying
sixteen wives, and leaving families to the care of twelve separate
parishes. That scamp is at this moment circulating and gyrating in
society, like a respectable _te-totum_, though we know not his exact
name, who, if he were pleased to reveal himself in seventeen parts of
this kingdom, where (to use the police language) he has been 'wanted'
for some years, would be hanged seventeen times running, besides putting
seventeen Government rewards into the pockets of seventeen policemen.
Oh, reader, you little know the unutterable romances perpetrated for
ever in our most populous empire, under cloud of night and distance and
utter poverty, Mark _that_--of utter poverty. Wealth is power; but it is
a jest in comparison of poverty. Splendour is power; but it is a joke to
obscurity. To be poor, to be obscure, to be a baker's apprentice or a
tailor's journeyman, throws a power about a man, clothes him with
attributes of ubiquity, _really_ with those privileges of concealment
which in the ring of Gyges were but fabulous. Is it a king, is it a
sultan, that such a man rivals? Oh, friend, he rivals a spiritual power.

Two men are on record, perhaps many more _might_ have been on that
record, who wrote so many books, and perpetrated so many pamphlets, that
at fifty they had forgotten much of their own literary villainies, and
at sixty they commenced with murderous ferocity a series of answers to
arguments which it was proved upon them afterwards that they themselves
had emitted at thirty--thus coming round with volleys of small shot on
their own heads, as the Whispering Gallery at St. Paul's begins to
retaliate any secrets you have committed to its keeping in echoing
thunders after a time, or as Sir John Mandeville under Arctic skies
heard in May all those curses thawing, and exploding like minute-guns,
which had been frozen up in November. Even like those self-replying
authors, even like those self-reverberators in St. Paul's, even like
those Arctic practitioners in cursing, who drew bills and _post obits_
in malediction, which were to be honoured after the death of winter,
many men are living at this moment in merry England who have figured in
so many characters, illustrated so many villages, run away from so many
towns, and performed the central part in so many careers, that were the
character, the village, the town, the career, brought back with all its
circumstances to their memories, positively they would fail to recognise
their own presence or incarnation in their own acts and bodies.

We have all read the story told by Addison of a sultan, who was
persuaded by a dervish to dip his head into a basin of enchanted water,
and thereupon found himself upon some other globe, a son in a poor
man's family, married after certain years the woman of his heart, had a
family of seven children whom he painfully brought up, went afterwards
through many persecutions, walked pensively by the seashore meditating
some escape from his miseries, bathed in the sea as a relief from the
noon-day heat, and on lifting up his head from the waves found himself
lifting up his head from the basin into which that cursed dervish had
persuaded him to dip. And when he would have cudgelled the holy man for
that long life of misery which had, through _his_ means, been inflicted
upon himself, behold! the holy man proved by affidavit that, in this
world, at any rate (where only he could be punishable), the life had
lasted but thirty-three seconds. Even so do the dark careers of many
amongst our obscure and migratory villains from years shrink up to
momentary specks, or, by their very multitude, altogether evanesce.
Burke and Hare, it is well known, had lost all count of their several
murders; they no more remembered, or could attempt to remember, their
separate victims, than a respectable old banker of seventy-three can
remember all the bills with their indorsements made payable for
half-a-century at his bank; or than Foote's turnpike-keeper, who had
kept all the toll-bar tickets to Kensington for forty-eight years,
pretended to recollect the features of all the men who had delivered
them at his gate. For a time, perhaps, Burke (who was a man of fine
sensibility) had a representative vision of spasms, and struggles, and
convulsions, terminating in a ten-pound note indorsed by Dr. ----. Hare,
on the other hand, was a man of principle, a man that you could depend
upon--order a corpse for Friday, and on Friday you had it--but he had
no feeling whatever. Yet see the unity of result for him and Burke. For
both alike all troublesome recollections gathered into one blue haze of
heavenly abstractions: orders executed with fidelity, cheques on the
bankers to be crossed and passed and cashed, are no more remembered.
That is the acme of perfection in our art.

One great class of criminals I am aware of in past times as having
specially tormented myself--the class who have left secrets, riddles,
behind them. What business has any man to bequeath a conundrum to all
posterity, unless he leaves in some separate channel the solution? This
must have been done in malice, and for the purpose of annoying us, lest
we should have too much proper enjoyment of life when he should have
gone. For nobody knows whether the scoundrel could have solved it
himself--too like in that respect to some charades which, in my boyish
days (but then I had the excuse of youth, which they had not), I not
unfrequently propounded to young ladies. Take this as a specimen: My
first raises a little hope; my second very little indeed; and my whole
is a vast roar of despair. No young lady could ever solve it; neither
could I. We all had to give it up. A charade that only needs an answer,
which, perhaps, some distant generation may supply, is but a half and
half, tentative approach to this. Very much of this nature was the
genius or Daimon (don't say _De_mon) of Socrates. How many thousands of
learned writers and printers have gone to sleep over too profound
attempts to solve _that_, which Socrates ought to have been able to
solve at sight. I am myself of opinion that it was a dram-bottle, which
someone raised a ghost to explain. Then the Entelecheia of Aristotle;
did you ever read about that, excellent reader? Most people fancy it to
have meant some unutterable crotchet in metaphysics, some horrible idea
(lest the police should be after it) without a name; that is, until the
Stagyrite repaired the injustice of his conduct by giving it a pretty
long one. My opinion now, as you are anxious to know it, is, that it was
a lady, a sweetheart of Aristotle's; for what was to hinder Aristotle
having a sweetheart? I dare say Thomas Aquinas, dry and arid as he was,
raised his unprincipled eyes to some Neapolitan beauty, began a sonnet
to some lady's eyebrow, though he might forget to finish it. And my
belief is that this lady, ambitious as Semele, wished to be introduced
as an eternal jewel into the great vault of her lover's immortal
Philosophy, which was to travel much farther and agitate far longer than
his royal pupil's conquests. Upon that Aristotle, keeping her hand,
said: 'My love, I'll think of it.' And then it occurred to him, that in
the very heavens many lovely ladies, Andromeda, Cassiopeia, Ariadne,
etc., had been placed as constellations in that map which many
chronologists suppose to have been prepared for the use of the ship
_Argo_, a whole generation before the Trojan war. Berenice, though he
could not be aware of _that_, had interest even to procure a place in
that map for her ringlets; and of course for herself she might have.
Considering which, Aristotle said: 'Hang me! if I don't put her among
the ten Categories!' On after thoughts he put her higher, for an
Entelecheia is as much above a Category as our Padishah Victoria is
above a Turkish sultan. 'But now, Stag,' said the lady (privileged as a
sweetheart she called him _Stag_, though everybody else was obliged to
call him Stagyrite), 'how will they know it's meant for me, Stag?' Upon
which I am sorry to say the philosopher fell to cursing and swearing,
bestowing blessings on his own optics and on posterity's, meaning yours
and mine, saying: 'Let them find it out.' Well, now, you see I _have_
found it out. But that is more than I hope for my crypto-criminals, and
therefore I take this my only way of giving them celebration and
malediction in one breath.

All anecdotes, as I have often remarked in print, are lies. It is
painful to use harsh words, and, knowing by my own feelings how much the
reader is shocked by this rude word _lies_, I should really be much
gratified if it were possible to supplant it by some gentler or more
courteous word, such as _falsehoods_, or even _fibs_, which dilutes the
atrocity of untruth into something of an amiable weakness, wrong, but
still venial, and natural (and so far, therefore, reasonable). Anything
for peace: but really in this instance I cannot indulge the reader. The
instincts of morality will not allow of it, and still less the passion
which made Juvenal a poet,[11] viz., the passion of enormous and bloody
indignation. From the beginning of this century, with wrath continually
growing, I have laid it down as a rule, and if the last year of it,
viz., A. D. 1900, should overhear _my_ voice amongst the babblings that
will then be troubling the atmosphere--in that case it will hear me
still reaffirming, with an indignation still gathering strength, and
therefore approaching ever nearer and nearer to a Juvenalian power of
versification, so that perhaps I shall then speak in rhymed
couplets--that all anecdotes pretending to be _smart_, but to a dead
certainty if they pretend to be _epigrammatic_, are and must be lies.
There is, in fact, no security for the truth of an anecdote, no
guarantee whatever, except its intense stupidity. If a man is searched
at a police-office, on the ground that he was caught trying the
window-shutters of silversmiths; then, if it should happen that in his
pockets is found absolutely nothing at all except one solitary
paving-stone, in that case Charity, which believeth all things (in fact,
is credulous to an anile degree), will be disposed to lock up the
paving-stone, and restore it to the man on his liberation as if it were
really his own, though philosophy mutters indignantly, being all but
certain that the fellow stole it. And really I have been too candid a
great deal in admitting that a man may appropriate an anecdote, and
establish his claim to it by pleading its awful stupidity. That might be
the case, and I believe it _was_, when anecdotes were many and writers
were few. But things are changed now. Fifty years ago, if a man were
seen running away with the pace of a lunatic, and you should sing out,
'Stop that fellow; he is running off with the shin-bone of my
great-grandmother!' all the people in the street would have cried out in
reply, 'Oh, nonsense! What should he want with your great-grandmother's
shin-bone?' and that would have seemed reasonable. But now, to see how
things are altered, any man of sense would reply, 'What should he want
with my great-grandmother's shin-bone? Why, he'll grind it, and then
he'll mix it with guano.' This is what he and the like of him have
actually done by shiploads of people far more entitled to consideration
than any one of my four great-grandmothers (for I had _four_, with eight
shin-bones amongst them). It is well known that the field of Waterloo
was made to render up all its bones, British or French, to certain
bone-mills in agricultural districts. Borodino and Leipzig, the two
bloodiest of modern battlefields, are supposed between them--what by the
harvest of battle, what by the harvest of neighbouring hospitals--to be
seized or possessed of four hundred thousand shin-bones, and other
interesting specimens to match. Negotiations have been proceeding at
various times between the leading bone-mills in England and the Jews in
Dresden or in Moscow. Hitherto these negotiations have broken down,
because the Jews stood out for 37 per shent., calculated upon the costs
of exhumation. But of late they show a disposition to do business at 33
per shent.: the contract will therefore move forwards again; it will go
ahead; and the dust of the faithful armies, together with the dust of
their enemies, will very soon be found, not in the stopper of a bunghole
(as Prince Hamlet conceived too prematurely), but in an unprecedented
crop of Swedish turnips.

Bones change their value, it seems thus clearly; and anecdotes change
their value; and in that proportion honesty, as regards one or the
other, changes the value of its chances. But what has all this to do
with 'Old Nick'? Stop: let me consider. That title was placed at the
head of this article, and I admit that it was placed there by myself.
Else, whilst I was wandering from my text, and vainly endeavouring to
recollect what it was that I had meant by this text, a random thought
came over me (immoral, but natural), that I would charge the heading of
_Old Nick_ upon the compositor, asserting that he had placed it there in
obstinate defiance of all the orders to the contrary, and supplications
to the contrary, that I had addressed to him for a month; by which means
I should throw upon _him_ the responsibility of accounting for so
portentous an ensign.

_Doctor_, I say, for I hear that the six Universities of England and
Scotland have sent you a doctor's degree, or, if they have not, all the
world knows they ought to have done; and the more shame for them if they
keep no 'Remembrancer' to put them in mind of what they must allow to be
amongst their most sacred duties. But that's all one. I once read in my
childhood a pretty book, called 'Wilson's Account of the Pelew Islands,'
at which islands, you know, H.M.S. _Antelope_ was wrecked--just about
the time, I fancy, when you, Doctor, and myself were in long petticoats
and making some noise in the world; the book was not written by Captain
Wilson, but by Keates, the sentimentalist. At the very end, however, is
an epitaph, and that _was_ written by the captain and ship's company:

    'Stop, reader, stop, let nature claim a tear;
     A prince of mine, Lee Boo, lies buried here.'

This epitaph used often to make me cry, and in commemoration of that
effect, which (like that of all cathartics that I know of, no matter how
drastic at first) has long been growing weaker and weaker, I propose
(upon your allowing me an opportunity) to superscribe you in any
churchyard you will appoint:

    'Stop, reader, stop, let genius claim a tear;
     A doct'r of mine, Lee Kit, lies buried here.'

'_Doct'r of_' you are to read into a dissyllable, and pretty much like
Boney's old friend on the road from Moscow, General Doct'roff, who
'doctor'd them off,' as the Laureate observes, and prescribed for the
whole French army _gratis_. But now to business.

For _your_ information, Doctor, it cannot be necessary, but on account
of very many readers it will be so, to say that Voss's 'Luise' has long
taken its place in the literature of Germany as a classical work--in
fact, as a gem or cabinet _chef d'oeuvre_; nay, almost as their unique
specimen in any national sense of the lighter and less pretending muse;
less pretending, I mean, as to the pomp or gravity of the subject, but
on that very account more pretending as respects the minuter graces of
its execution. In the comparative estimate of Germans, the 'Luise' holds
a station corresponding to that of our 'Rape of the Lock,' or of
Gresset's 'Vert-vert'--corresponding, that is, in its _degree_ of
relative value. As to its _kind_ of value, some notion may be formed of
it even in that respect also from the 'Rape of the Lock,' but with this
difference, that the scenes and situations and descriptions are there
derived from the daily life and habits of a fashionable belle and the
fine gentlemen who surround her, whereas in the 'Luise' they are derived
exclusively from the homelier and more patriarchal economy of a rural
clergyman's household; and in this respect the 'Luise' comes nearest by
much, in comparison of any other work that I know of, to our own 'Vicar
of Wakefield.' Like that delightful portrait of rural life in a
particular aspect, or idyll as it might be called, the 'Luise' aims at
throwing open for our amusement the interior of a village parsonage
(_Scotice_, 'manse'); like that in its earlier half (for the latter half
of the 'Vicar' is a sad collapse from the truth and nature of the
original conception into the marvellous of a commonplace novel), the
'Luise' exhibits the several members of a rustic clergyman's family
according to their differences of sex, age, and standing, in their
natural, undisguised features, all unconsciously marked by
characteristic foibles, all engaged in the exercise of their daily
habits, neither finer nor coarser than circumstances naturally allow,
and all indulging in such natural hopes or fictions of romance as grow
out of their situation in life. The 'Luise,' in short, and the 'Vicar of
Wakefield' are both alike a succession of circumstantial delineations
selected from mere rustic life, but rustic life in its most pure and
intellectual form; for as to the noble countess in the 'Luise,' or the
squire and his uncle, Sir William, in the 'Vicar of Wakefield,' they do
not interfere sufficiently to disturb the essential level of the
movement as regards the incidents, or to colour the manners and the
scenery. Agreeing, however, in this general purpose, the two works
differ in two considerable features; one, that the 'Vicar of Wakefield'
describes the rural clergyman of England, 'Luise' the rural clergyman of
North Germany; the other, that the English idyll is written in prose,
the German in verse--both of which differences, and the separate
peculiarities growing out of them, will, it may perhaps be thought,
require a few words of critical discussion.

There has always existed a question as to the true principles of
translation when applied, not to the mere literature of _knowledge_
(because _there_ it is impossible that two opinions can arise, by how
much closer the version by so much the better), but to the literature of
_power_, and to such works--above all, to poems--as might fairly be
considered _works of art_ in the highest sense. To what extent the
principle of _compensation_ might reasonably be carried, the license,
that is, of departing from the strict literal forms of the original
writer, whether as to expressions, images, or even as to the secondary
thoughts, for the sake of reproducing them in some shape less repellent
to a modern ear, and therefore virtually sustaining the harmony of the
composition by preventing the attention from settling in a
disproportionate degree upon what might have a startling effect to a
taste trained under modern discipline--this question has always been
pending as a question open to revision before the modern courts of
criticism; as surely to you, Dr. North, one of the chief 'swells' on
that bench, I need not say. But, for the sake of accurate thinking, it
is worth while observing that formerly this question was moved almost
exclusively with a view to the Latin and Greek classics; and that
circumstance gave a great and a very just bias to the whole dispute. For
the difference with regard to any capital author of ancient days, as
compared with modern authors, is this, that here we have a twofold
interest--an interest with work, and a separate interest in the writer.
Take the 'Prometheus Desmotes' of Æschylus, and suppose that a
translator should offer us an English 'Prometheus,' which he
acknowledged to be very free, but at the same time contended that his
variations from the Greek were so many downright improvements, so that,
if he had not given us the genuine 'Prometheus,' he had given us
something better. In such a case we should all reply, but we do not want
something better. Our object is not the best possible drama that could
be produced on the fable of 'Prometheus'; what we want is the very
'Prometheus' that was written by Æschylus, the very drama that was
represented at Athens. The Athenian audience itself, and what pleased
its taste, is already one subject of interest. Æschylus on his own
account is another. These are collateral and alien subjects of interest
quite independent of our interest in the drama, and for the sake of
these we wish to see the real original 'Prometheus'--not according to
any man's notion of improvement, but such as came from a sublime Grecian
poet, such as satisfied a Grecian audience, more than two thousand years
ago. We wish, in fact, for the real Æschylus, 'unhousel'd, unaneal'd,'
with all his imperfections on his head.

Such was the way, and the just way, of arguing the point when the
application was limited to a great authentic classic of the Antique; nor
was the case at all different where Ariosto or any other illustrious
Italian classic was concerned. But a new sort of casuistry in this
question has arisen in our own times, and by accident chiefly in
connection with German literature; but it may well be, Dr. North, that
you will be more diverted by a careful scrutiny of my metres after Voss
in illustration, than by any further dissertation on my part on a
subject that you know so well.

_The Parson's Dinner._

  In the month of leafy June, beneath celestial azure
  Of skies all cloudless, sate the aged Rector of Esthwaite
  Dining amidst his household; but not the meridian ardour
  Of sunbeams fierce he felt; him the shady veranda
  With vine-clad trellis defends: beyond a pendulous awning
  Of boughs self-wreath'd from limes (whose mighty limbs overarching
  Spanned the low roof of the house) spreads far effectual umbrage
  For young and old alike; noontide awfully breathless
  Settled in deepest silence on the woods and valley of Esthwaite.
  Yet not the less there would rise, after stillest interval often,      
  Low whispering gales that stole, like sobbing murmur of infant
  Dreaming in arms maternal, into the heart o' the youngest:
  Gales that at most could raise a single ringlet of auburn
  As it pencill'd the noble brow of the youthful Anna Louisa--
  Sole child that survived to thee, oh, aged pastor of Esthwaite.
  Clad in his morning gown, the reverend priest at a table
  Of sculptur'd stone was seated; and his seat was a massy but easy
  Settle of oak, which in youth his ancient servitor, Isaac,
  Footman, sexton, and steward, butler and gardener also,
  Carved by the winter fire in nights of gloomy November,
  And through many a long, long night of many a dark December.           
  The good man's heart was glad, and his eyes were suffus'd with a
      rapture
  Of perfect love as they settled on her--that pulse of his heart's
      blood,
  The one sole prop of his house, the beautiful Anna Louisa.
  By the side of himself sate his wife, that ancient tamer of
      housemaids,[12]
  Yet kind of heart as a dove, and with matron graces adorning
  Her place as she sate dispensing hospitality boundless
  To the strangers within her gates; for, lo! two strangers on one side
  Sate of the long stone table; yet strangers by manner or action
  One would not suppose them; nor were they, but guests ever honour'd,   
  And dear to each heart in the house of th' ancient Rector of
      Esthwaite.
  The elder of them was called Augustus Harry Delancey,
  And he rode as a cornet of horse in the mighty imperial army.
  Him had the parents approved (and those were melodious accents,
  The sweetest he ever had heard) as suitor of Anna Louisa.
  But from lips more ruby far--far more melodious accents
  Had reach'd his ears since then; for she, the daughter, her own self,
  Had condescended at last to utter sweet ratification
  Of all his hopes; low whisp'ring the 'yes'--celestial answer
  That raised him to paradise gates on pinion[13] of expectation.        
  Over against his beloved he sate--the suitor enamour'd:
  And God He knows that indeed should it prove an idolatrous error
  To look in the eyes of a lady till you feel a dreamy devotion,
  I fear for the health of your soul that day, oh, Harry Delancey!
  Next to Delancey there sate his pupil, Magnus Adolphus,
  A fair-haired boy of ten, half an orphan, a count of the empire--
  Magnus Adolphus of Arnstein, that great Bavarian earldom.
  Him had his widowed mother, the noble Countess of Arnstein,
  Placed with Delancey betimes, as one in knightly requirements
  Skilful and all-accomplished, that he the 'youthful idea'[14]          
  Might 'teach how to shoot' (with a pistol, videlicet),--horses
  To mount and to manage with boldness, hounds to follow in hunting
  The fox, the tusky boar, the stag with his beautiful antlers:
  Arts, whether graceful or useful, in arms or equestrian usage,
  Did Augustus impart to his pupil, the youthful earl of the empire.
  To ride with stirrups or none, to mount from the near-side or off-side
  (Which still is required in the trooper who rides in the Austrian
      army),
  To ride with bridle or none, on a saddle Turkish or English,
  To force your horse to curvet, pirouette, dance on his haunches,
  And whilst dancing to lash with his feet, and suggest an effectual
      hinting                                                            
  To the enemy's musqueteers to clear the road for the hinter:
  Or again, if you want a guide by night, in a dangerous highway
  Beset with the enemies' marksmen and swarming with murderous ambush,
  To train your horse in the art of delicate insinuation,
  Gently raising a hoof to tap at the door o' the woodsman.
  But, if he persists in snoring, or pretending to snore, or is angry
  At your summons to leave his lair in the arms of his wife or his
      infants,
  To practise your horse in the duty of stormy recalcitration,
  Wheeling round to present his heels, and in mid caracoling
  To send the emperor's greeting smack through the panel of oakwood[15]  
  That makes the poor man so hard of hearing imperial orders.
  Arts such as these and others, the use of the sabre on horseback,
  All modes of skill gymnastic, modes whether forceful or artful,
  Of death-grapple if by chance a cannon-shot should un-horse you,
  All modes of using the limbs with address, with speed, or enormous
  Effort of brutal strength, all this did Harry Delancey
  Teach to his docile pupil: and arts more nobly delightful,
  Arts of the head or the heart, arts intellectual; empire
  Over dead men's books, over regions of high meditation,
  Comparative tactics, warfare as then conducted in ages
  When powder was none, nor cannon, but brute catapultæ,                 
  Blind rams, brainless wild asses, the stony slinger of huge
      stones.[16]
  Iron was lord of the world; iron reigned, man was his engine;
  But now the rule is reversed, man binds and insults over iron.
  Together did they, young tutor, young pupil, Augustus, Adolphus,
  Range over history martial, or read strategical authors,
  Xenophon, Arrian, old Polybius, old Polyænus
  (Think not these Polys, my boy, were blooming Pollies of our days!),
  And above all others, they read the laurel'd hero of heroes,
  Thrice kingly Roman Julius, sun-bright leader of armies,
  Who planted his god-like foot on the necks of a whole generation.      
  Such studies, such arts were those by which young Harry Delancey
  Sought to discharge the trust which to him the Lady of Arnstein
  Confided with hopes maternal; thus trained, he hoped that Adolphus
  Would shine in his native land, for high was his place in the empire.

We have heard from a man who witnessed the failure of Miss Baillie's 'De
Montford,' notwithstanding the scenic advantages of a vast London
theatre, fine dresses, fine music at intervals, and, above all, the
superb acting of John Kemble, supported on that occasion by his
incomparable sister, that this unexpected disappointment began with the
gallery, who could not comprehend or enter into a hatred so fiendish
growing out of causes so slight as any by possibility supposable in the
trivial Rezenvelt. To feel teased by such a man, to dislike him,
occasionally to present him with your compliments in the shape of a
duodecimo kick--well and good, nothing but right. And the plot
manifestly tended to a comic issue. But murder!--a Macbeth murder!--not
the injury so much as the man himself was incommensurate, was too slight
by a thousand degrees for so appalling a catastrophe. It reacts upon De
Montford, making _him_ ignoble that could be moved so profoundly by an
agency so contemptible.

Something of the same disproportion there is, though in a different way,
between any quarrel that may have divided us from a man in his life-time
and the savage revenge of pursuing the quarrel after his death through a
malicious biography. Yet, if you hated him through no quarrel, but
simply (as we all hate many men that died a thousand years ago) for
something vicious, or which you think vicious, in his modes of thinking,
why must you, of all men, be the one to undertake an edition of his
works, 'with a life of the author'? Leave that to some neutral writer,
who neither loves nor hates. And whilst crowds of men need better
biographical records whom it is easy to love and not difficult to
honour, do not you degrade your own heart or disgust your readers by
selecting for your exemplification not a model to be imitated, but a
wild beast to be baited or a criminal to be tortured? We privately hate
Mr. Thomas Hobbes, of Malmsbury; we know much evil of him, and we could
expose many of his tricks effectually. We also hate Dean Swift, and upon
what we think substantial arguments. Some of our own contemporaries we
hate particularly; Cobbett, for instance, and other bad fellows in
fustian and corduroys. But for that very reason we will not write their
lives. Or, if we should do so, only because they might happen to stand
as individuals in a series, and after warning the reader of our own
bias. For it is too odious a spectacle to imprison a fellow-creature in
a book, like a stag in a cart, and turn him out to be hunted through all
his doubles for a day's amusement. It too much resembles that case of
undoubted occurrence both in France and Germany, where 'respectable'
individuals, simply as amateurs, and not at all with any view to the
salary or fees of operating, have come forward as candidates for the
post of public executioner. What is every man's duty is no man's duty by
preference. And unless where a writer is thrust upon such a duty by an
official necessity (as, if he contracts for a 'Biographia Britannica,'
in that case he is bound by his contract to go through with the whole
series--rogues and all), it is too painful to see a human being courting
and wooing the task of doing execution upon his brother in his grave.
Nay, even in the case where this executioner's task arises spontaneously
out of some duty previously undertaken without a thought of its severer
functions, we are still shocked by any exterminating vengeance too
rancorously pursued. Every reader must have been disgusted by the
unrelenting persecution with which Gifford, a deformed man, with the
spiteful nature sometimes too developed in the deformed, had undertaken
'for our fathers in the Row' an edition of Massinger. Probably he had
not thought at the time of the criminals who would come before him for
judgment. But afterwards it did not embitter the job that these
perquisites of office accrued, _lucro ponatur_, that such offenders as
Coxeter, Mr. Monck Mason, and others were to be 'justified' by course of
law. Could he not have stated their errors, and displaced their rubbish,
without further personalities? However, he does _not_, but makes the air
resound with his knout, until the reader wishes Coxeter in his throat,
and Monck Mason, like 'the cursed old fellow' in Sinbad, mounted with
patent spurs upon his back.

We shall be interrupted, however, and _that_ we certainly foresee, by
the objection--that we are fighting with shadows, that neither the
_éloge_ in one extreme, nor the libel in the other extreme, finds a
place in _our_ literature. Does it not? Yes, reader, each of these
biographical forms exists in favour among us, and of one it is very
doubtful indeed whether it ought not to exist. The _éloge_ is found
abundantly diffused through our monumental epitaphs in the first place,
and _there_ every man will countersign Wordsworth's judgment (see 'The
Excursion' and also Wordsworth's prose Essay on Epitaphs), that it is a
blessing for human nature to find one place in this world sacred to
charitable thoughts, one place at least offering a sanctuary from evil
speaking. So far there is no doubt. But the main literary form, in which
the English _éloge_ presents itself, is the Funeral Sermon. And in this
also, not less than in the churchyard epitaph, kind feeling ought to
preside; and for the same reasons, the sanctity of the place where it is
delivered or originally published, and the solemnity of the occasion
which has prompted it; since, if you cannot find matter in the departed
person's character fertile in praise even whilst standing by the
new-made grave, what folly has tempted you into writing an epitaph or a
funeral sermon? The good ought certainly to predominate in both, and in
the epitaph nothing _but_ the good, because were it only for a reason
suggested by Wordsworth, viz., the elaborate and everlasting character
of a record chiselled out painfully in each separate letter, it would be
scandalous to confer so durable an existence in stone or marble upon
trivial human infirmities, such as do not enter into the last solemn
reckoning with the world beyond the grave; whilst, on the other hand,
all graver offences are hushed into 'dread repose,' and, where they
happen to be too atrocious or too memorable, are at once a sufficient
argument for never having undertaken any such memorial. These
considerations privilege the epitaph as sacred to charity, and tabooed
against the revelations of candour. The epitaph cannot open its scanty
records to any breathing or insinuation of infirmity. But the Funeral
Sermon, though sharing in the same general temper of indulgence towards
the errors of the deceased person, might advantageously be laid open to
a far more liberal discussion of those personal or intellectual
weaknesses which may have thwarted the influence of character otherwise
eminently Christian. The _Oraison Funèbre_ of the French proposes to
itself by its original model, which must be sought in the _Epideictic_
or panegyrical oratory of the Greeks, a purpose purely and exclusively
eulogistic: the problem supposed is to abstract from everything _not_
meritorious, to expand and develop the total splendour of the individual
out of that one centre, that main beneficial relation to his own age,
from which this splendour radiated. The incidents of the life, the
successions of the biographical detail, are but slightly traced, no
farther, in fact, than is requisite to the intelligibility of the
praises. Whereas, in the English Funeral Sermon, there is no principle
of absolute exclusion operating against the minutest circumstantiations
of fact which can tend to any useful purpose of illustrating the
character. And what is too much for the scale of a sermon literally
preached before a congregation, or modelled to counterfeit such a mode
of address, may easily find its place in the explanatory notes. This is
no romance, or ideal sketch of what might be. It is, and it has been.
There are persons of memorable interest in past times, of whom all that
we know is embodied in a funeral sermon. For instance, Jeremy Taylor in
that way, or by his Epistles Dedicatory, has brought out the
characteristic features in some of his own patrons, whom else we should
have known only as _nominis umbras_. But a more impressive illustration
is found in the case of John Henderson, that man of whom expectations so
great were formed, and of whom Dr. Johnson and Burke, after meeting and
conversing with him, pronounced (in the Scriptural words of the
Ethiopian queen applied to the Jewish king, Solomon) 'that the half had
not been told them.' For this man's memory almost the sole original
record exists in Aguttar's funeral sermon; for though other records
exist, and one from the pen of a personal friend, Mr. Joseph Cottle, of
Bristol, yet the main substance of the biography is derived from the
_fundus_ of this one sermon.[17] And it is of some importance to cases
of fugitive or unobtrusive merit that this more quiet and sequestered
current of biography should be kept open. For the local motives to an
honorary biographical notice, in the shape of a Funeral Sermon, will
often exist, when neither the materials are sufficient, nor a writer
happens to be disposable, for a labour so serious as a regular
biography.

Here then, on the one side, are our English _éloges_. And we may add
that amongst the Methodists, the Baptists, and other religious
sectaries, but especially among the missionaries of all nations and
churches, this class of _éloges_ is continually increasing. Not
unfrequently men of fervent natures and of sublime aspirations are thus
rescued from oblivion, whilst the great power of such bodies as the
Methodists, their growing wealth, and consequent responsibility to
public opinion, are pledges that they will soon command all the
advantages of colleges and academic refinement; so that if, in the
manner of these funeral _éloges_, there has sometimes been missed that
elegance which should have corresponded to the weight of the matter,
henceforwards we may look to see this disadvantage giving way before
institutions more thoroughly matured. But if these are our _éloges_, on
the other hand, where are our libels?

This is likely to be a topic of offence, for many readers will start at
hearing the upright Samuel Johnson and the good-humoured, garrulous
Plutarch denounced as traffickers in libel. But a truth is a truth. And
the temper is so essentially different in which men lend themselves to
the propagation of defamatory anecdotes, the impulses are so various to
an offence which is not always consciously perceived by those who are
parties to it, that we cannot be too cautious of suffering our hatred of
libel to involve every casual libeller, or of suffering our general
respect for the person of the libeller to exonerate him from the charge
of libelling. Many libels are written in this little world of ours
unconsciously, and under many motives. Perhaps we said that before, but
no matter. Sometimes a gloomy fellow, with a murderous cast of
countenance, sits down doggedly to the task of blackening one whom he
hates worse 'than toad or asp.' For instance, Procopius performs that
'labour of hate' for the Emperor Justinian, pouring oil into his wounds,
but, then (as Coleridge expresses it in a 'neat' sarcasm), oil of
vitriol. Nature must have meant the man for a Spanish Inquisitor, sent
into the world before St. Dominic had provided a trade for him, or any
vent for his malice--so rancorous in his malignity, so horrid and
unrelenting the torture to which he subjects his sovereign and the
beautiful Theodora. In this case, from the withering scowl which
accompanies the libels, we may be assured that they _are_ such in the
most aggravated form--not malicious only, but false. It is commonly
said, indeed, in our courts, that truth it is which aggravates the
libel. And so it is as regards the feelings or the interests of the man
libelled. For is it not insufferable that, if a poor man under common
human infirmity shall have committed some crime and have paid its
penalty, but afterwards reforming or out-growing his own follies, seeks
to gain an honest livelihood for his children in a place which the
knowledge of his past transgression has not reached, then all at once he
is to be ruined by some creature purely malignant who discovers and
publishes the secret tale? In such a case most undoubtedly it is the
truth of the libel which constitutes its sting, since, if it were not
true or could be made questionable, it would do the poor man no
mischief. But, on the other hand, it is the falsehood of the libel which
forms its aggravation as regards the publisher. And certain we are, had
we no other voucher than the instinct of our hatred to Procopius, that
his disloyal tales about his great lord and lady are odiously
overcharged, if not uniformly false. Gibbon, however, chooses to gratify
his taste for the luxury of scandal by believing at once in the perfect
malice of the slanderer, and the perfect truth of his slanders.

Here then, in this Procopius, is an instance of the gloomy libeller,
whose very gloom makes affidavit of his foul spirit from the first.
There is also another form, less odious, of the hostile libeller: it
occurs frequently in cases where the writer is not chargeable with
secret malice, but is in a monstrous passion. A shower-bath might be of
service in that case, whereas in the Procopius case nothing but a
copious or a _Pro_copius application of the knout can answer. We, for
instance, have (or had, for perhaps it has been stolen) a biography of
that same Parker, afterwards Bishop of Oxford, with whom Andrew Marvell
'and others who called Milton friend' had such rough-and-tumble feuds
about 1666, and at whose expense it was that Marvell made the whole
nation merry in his 'Rehearsal Transprosed.' This Parker had a 'knack'
at making himself odious; he had a _curiosa felicitas_ in attracting
hatreds, and wherever he lodged for a fortnight he trailed after him a
vast parabolic or hyperbolic tail of enmity and curses, all smoke and
fire and tarnish, which bore the same ratio to his small body of merit
that a comet's tail, measuring billions of miles, does to the little
cometary mass. The rage against him was embittered by politics, and
indeed sometimes by knavish tricks; the first not being always
'confounded,' nor the last 'frustrated.' So that Parker, on the whole,
was a man whom it might be held a duty to hate, and therefore, of
course, to knout as often as you could persuade him to expose a fair
extent of surface for the action of the lash. Many men purchased a knout
for his sake, and took their chance for getting a 'shy' at him, as
Parker might happen to favour their intentions. But one furious
gentleman, who is resolved to 'take his full change' out of Parker, and
therefore to lose no time, commences operations in the very first words
of his biography: 'Parker,' says he, 'the author of ----, was the _spawn_
of Samuel Parker.' His rage will not wait for an opportunity; he throws
off a torrent of fiery sparks in advance, and gives full notice to
Parker that he will run his train right into him, if he can come up with
his rear. This man is not malicious, but truculent; like the elder
Scaliger, of whom it was observed that, having been an officer of
cavalry up to his fortieth year (when he took to learning Greek), he
always fancied himself on horseback, charging, and cutting throats in
the way of professional duty, as often as he found himself summoned to
pursue and 'cut up' some literary delinquent. Fire and fury, 'bubble and
squeak,' is the prevailing character of his critical composition. 'Come,
and let me give thee to the fowls of the air,' is the cry with which the
martial critic salutes the affrighted author. Yet, meantime, it is
impossible that he can entertain any personal malice, for he does not
know the features of the individual enemy whom he is pursuing. But thus
far he agrees with the Procopian order of biographers--that both are
governed, in whatever evil they may utter, by a spirit of animosity: one
by a belligerent spirit which would humble its enemy as an enemy in a
fair pitched battle, the other by a subtle spirit of malice, which would
exterminate its enemy not in that character merely, but as an individual
by poison or by strangling.

Libels, however, may be accredited and published where there is no
particle of enmity or of sudden irritation. Such were the libels of
Plutarch and Dr. Johnson. They are libels prompted by no hostile
feelings at all, but adopted by mere blind spirit of credulity. In this
world of ours, so far as we are acquainted with its doings, there are
precisely four series--four aggregate bodies--of _Lives_, and no more,
which you can call celebrated; which _have_ had, and are likely to have,
an extensive influence--each after its own kind. Which be they? To
arrange them in point of time, first stand Plutarch's lives of eminent
Greeks and Romans; next, the long succession of the French Memoirs,
beginning with Philippe de Commines, in the time of Louis XI. or our
Edward IV., and ending, let us say, with the slight record of himself
(but not without interest) of Louis XVIII.; thirdly, the _Acta
Sanctorum_ of the Bollandists; fourthly, Dr. Johnson's 'Lives of the
Poets.' The third is a biographical record of the Romish saints,
following the order of the martyrology as it is digested through the
Roman calendar of the year; and, as our own 'Biographia Britannica' has
only moved forwards in seventy years to the letter 'H,' or thereabouts
(which may be owing to the dissenting blight of Dr. Kippis), _pari
passu_, the _Acta Sanctorum_ will be found not much farther advanced
than the month of May--a pleasant month certainly, but (as the
_Spectator_ often insinuates) perilous to saintship. Laying this work
out of consideration, as being chiefly employed in eulogy such as
_could_ not be extravagant when applied to the glorious army of martyrs
(although here also, we doubt not, are many libels against men
concerning whom it matters little whether they were libelled or not),
all the rest of the great biographical works are absolutely saturated
with libels. Plutarch may be thought to balance his extravagant slanders
by his impossible eulogies. He sees nothing wonderful in actions that
were far beyond the level of any motives existing under pagan
moralities; and, on the other hand, he traduces great men like Cæsar,
whose natures were beyond his scale of measurement, by tracing their
policy to petty purposes entirely Plutarchian. But he was a Greekling in
a degenerate age of Grecians. As to the French Memoirs, which are often
so exceedingly amusing, they purchase their liveliness by one eternal
sacrifice of plain truth. Their repartees, felicitous _propos_, and
pointed anecdotes are but one rolling fire of falsehoods. And,
generally, it may be laid down as a rule, that all collectors of happy
retorts and striking anecdotes are careless of truth. Louis XIV. _does_
seem to have had a natural gift of making brilliant compliments and
happy impromptus; and yet the very best of his reputed _mots_ were
spurious. Some may be traced to Cicero, Hierocles, Diogenes; and some to
his modern predecessors. That witty remark ascribed to him about the
disposition of Fortune, as being a lady, to withdraw her favours from
old men like himself and the Maréchal Boufflers, was really uttered
nearly two centuries before by the Emperor Charles V., who probably
stole it from some Spanish collection of jests. And so of fifty in every
hundred beside. And the French are not only apt beyond other nations to
abuse the license of stealing from our predecessor _quod licuit
semperque licebit_, but also, in a degree peculiar to themselves, they
have a false de-naturalized taste in the humorous, and as to the limits
of the extravagant. We have formerly illustrated this point, and
especially we noticed it as a case impossible to any nation _but_ the
French to have tolerated the pretended 'absences' of La Fontaine--as,
for instance, his affecting to converse with his own son as an entire
stranger, and asking the lady who had presented him what might be the
name of that amiable young man. The _incredulus odi_ faces one in every
page of a French memoir; veracity is an unknown virtue, and, wherever
that is the taste, look for libels by wholesale. Too often even the
unnatural and the monstrous is courted, rather than miss the object of
arresting and startling. Now, Dr. Johnson's calumnies or romances were
not of that order. He had a healthy spirit of reverence for truth; but
he was credulous to excess, and he was plagued by an infirmity not
uncommon amongst literary men who have no families of young people
growing up around their hearth--the hankering after gossip. He was
curious about the domestic habits of his celebrated countrymen;
inquisitive in a morbid degree about their pecuniary affairs: 'What have
you got in that pocket which bulges out so prominently?' 'What did your
father do with that hundred guineas which he received on Monday from
Jacob Jonson?' And, as his 'swallow' was enormous--as the Doctor would
believe more fables in an hour than an able-bodied liar would invent in
a week--naturally there was no limit to the slanders with which his
'Lives of the Poets' are overrun.

Of the four great biographical works which we have mentioned, we hold
Dr. Johnson's to be by far the best in point of composition. Even
Plutarch, though pardonably overrated in consequence of the great
subjects which he treats (which again are 'great' by benefit of distance
and the vast abstracting process executed by time upon the petty and the
familiar), is loose and rambling in the principles of his _nexus_; and
there lies the great effort for a biographer, there is the strain, and
that is the task--viz., to weld the disconnected facts into one
substance, and by interfusing natural reflections to create for the
motions of his narrative a higher impulse than one merely chronologic.
In this respect, the best of Dr. Johnson's 'Lives' are undoubtedly the
very best which exist. They are the most highly finished amongst all
masterpieces of the biographic art, and, as respects the Doctor
personally, they are, beyond comparison, his best work. It is a great
thing in any one art or function, even though it were not a great one,
to have excelled all the literature of all languages. And if the reader
fancies that there lurks anywhere a collection of lives, or even one
life (though it were the 'Agricola' of Tacitus), which as a work of
refined art and execution can be thought equal to the best of Dr.
Johnson's, we should be grateful to him if he would assign it in a
letter to Mr. Blackwood:

               'And though the night be raw,
    We'll see it too, the first we ever saw.'

We say nothing of the Calmuck Tartars; they hold (see Bergmann's
'Streifereien') that their 'Dschangariade' is the finest of all epic
poems, past or coming; and, therefore, the Calmuck Lives of the Poets
will naturally be inimitable. But confining our view to the unhappy
literatures of Europe, ancient or modern, this is what we think of Dr.
Johnson's efforts as a biographer. Consequently, we cannot be taxed with
any insensibility to his merit. And as to the critical part of his
Lives, if no thoughtful reader can be expected to abide by his haughty
decisions, yet, on the other hand, every man reads his opinions with
pleasure, from the intellectual activity and the separate justice of the
thoughts which they display. But as to his libellous propensity, that
rests upon independent principles; for all his ability and all his logic
could not elevate his mind above the region of gossip.

Take his 'Life of Savage.' This was the original nest-egg, upon which,
as a basis, and perhaps as the occasional suggestion of such an
enterprise, all the rest--allow us a pompous word--supervened. It was
admirably written, because written _con amore_, and also because written
_con odio_; and under either impulse is it possible to imagine grosser
delusions? Johnson persuaded himself that Savage was a fine gentleman (a
_rôle_ not difficult to support in that age, when ceremony and a
gorgeous _costume_ were amongst the auxiliary distinctions of a
gentleman), and also that he was a man of genius. The first claim was
necessarily taken upon trust by the Doctor's readers; the other might
have been examined; but after a few painful efforts to read 'The
Wanderer' and other insipid trifles, succeeding generations have
resolved to take _that_ upon trust also; for in very truth Savage's
writings are of that order which 'do not let themselves be read.' Why,
then, had publishers bought them? Publishers in those days were mere
tradesmen, without access to liberal society. Even Richardson, though a
man of great genius, in his publisher's character was an obsequious,
nay, servile, admirer of the fine gentleman who wore a sword,
embroidered clothes, and Mechlin ruffles about his wrists; above all
things, he glorified and adored a Lovelace, with a fine person, who sang
gaily to show his carelessness of low people, never came abroad except
in a sedan-chair, and liberally distributed his curses to the right and
the left in all respectable men's shops. This temper, with her usual
sagacity, Lady M. Wortley Montagu could detect in Richardson, and for
this she despised him. But this it was, and some little vision of
possible patronage from Lord Tyrconnel, which had obtained any prices at
all for Savage from such knowing publishers as were then arising; but
generally Savage had relied upon subscriptions, which were still common,
and, in his case, as a man supposed unfortunate, were given purely as
charity. With what astonishment does a literary foreigner of any
judgment find a Savage placed amongst the classics of England! and from
the scale of his life reasonably he must infer that he is ranked amongst
the leaders, whilst the extent in which his works are multiplied would
throw him back upon the truth--that he is utterly unknown to his
countrymen. These, however, were the delusions of good nature. But what
are we to think of Dr. Johnson's abetting that monstrous libel against
Lady Macclesfield? She, unhappily, as a woman banished without hope from
all good society by her early misconduct as a wife (but, let it not be
forgotten, a neglected wife), had nobody to speak a word on her behalf:
all evil was believed of one who had violated her marriage vows. But had
the affair occurred in our days, the public journals would have righted
her. They would have shown the folly of believing a vain, conceited man
like Savage and his nurse, with no vouchers whatever, upon a point where
they had the deepest interest at stake; whilst on the opposite side,
supposing their story true, spoke for them the strongest of all natural
instincts--the pleading of the maternal heart, combated by no
self-interest whatever. Surely if Lady Macclesfield had not been
supported by indignation against an imposture, merely for her own ease
and comfort, she would have pensioned Savage, or have procured him some
place under Government--not difficult in those days for a person with
her connections (however sunk as respected _female_ society) to have
obtained for an only son. In the sternness of her resistance to all
attempts upon her purse we read her sense of the fraud. And, on the
other hand, was the conduct of Savage that of a son? He had no legal
claims upon her, consequently no pretence for molesting her in her
dwelling-house. And would a real son--a great lubberly fellow, well able
to work as a porter or a footman--however wounded at her obstinate
rejection, have been likely, in pursuit of no legal rights, to have
alarmed her by threatening letters and intrusions, for no purpose but
one _confessedly_ of pecuniary extortion? From the very mode of pursuing
his claim it is plain that Savage felt it to be a false one. It seems,
also, to be forgotten by most readers, that at this day real sons--not
denied to be such--are continually banished, nay, ejected forcibly by
policemen, from the paternal roof in requital of just such profligate
conduct as Savage displayed; so that, grant his improbable story, still
he was a disorderly reprobate, who in these days would have been
consigned to the treadmill. But the whole was a hoax.

Savage, however, is but a single case, in relation to which Dr. Johnson
stood in a special position, that diseased his judgment. But look at
Pope's life, at Swift's, at Young's--at all the lives of men
contemporary with himself: they are overrun with defamatory stories, or
traits of that order which would most have stung them, had they returned
to life. But it was an accident most beneficial to Dr. Johnson that
nearly all these men left no near relatives behind to call him to
account. The public were amused, as they always are by exhibitions of
infirmity or folly in one whom otherwise they were compelled to admire;
that was a sort of revenge for them to set off against a painful
perpetuity of homage. Thus far the libels served only as jests, and,
fortunately for Dr. Johnson, there arose no after-reckoning. One period,
in fact, of thirty years had intervened between the last of these men
and the publication of the Lives; it was amongst the latest works of Dr.
Johnson: thus, and because most of them left no descendants, he escaped.
Had the ordinary proportion of these men been married, the result would
have been different; and whatever might have been thought of any
individual case amongst the complaints, most undoubtedly, from the great
number to which the Doctor had exposed himself, amongst which many were
not of a nature to be evaded by any vouchers whatsoever, a fatal effect
would have settled on the Doctor's moral reputation. He would have been
passed down to posterity as a dealer in wholesale scandal, who cared
nothing for the wounded feelings of relatives. It is a trifle after that
to add that he would frequently have been cudgelled.

This public judgment upon Dr. Johnson and these cudgellings would have
been too severe a chastisement for the offences, which, after all,
argued no heavier delinquency than a levity in examining his chance
authorities, and a constitutional credulity. Dr. Johnson's easiness of
faith for the supernatural, the grossness of his superstition in
relation to such miserable impostures as the Cock Lane ghost, and its
scratchings on the wall, flowed from the same source; and his
conversation furnishes many proofs that he had no principle of
resistance in his mind, no reasonable scepticism, when any disparaging
anecdote was told about his nearest friends. Who but he would have
believed the monstrous tale: that Garrick, so used to addressing large
audiences _extempore_, so quick and lively in his apprehensions, had
absolutely been dismissed from a court of justice as an idiot--as a man
incapable of giving the court information even upon a question of his
own profession? As to his credulity with respect to the somewhat
harmless forgeries of Psalmanazer, and with respect to the villainous
imposture of Lander, we imagine that other causes co-operated to those
errors beyond mere facility of assenting. In the latter case we fear
that jealousy of Milton as a scholar, a feeling from which he never
cleansed himself, had been the chief cause of his so readily delivering
himself a dupe to allegations _not_ specious, backed by forgeries that
were anything but ingenious. Dr. Johnson had a narrow escape on that
occasion. Had Dr. Douglas fastened upon him as the collusive abettor of
Lander, as the man whose sanction had ever won even a momentary credit
for the obscure libeller, and as the one beyond all others of the age
whose critical occupation ought most to have secured him against such a
delusion, the character of Johnson would have suffered seriously.
Luckily, Dr. Douglas spared him; and Johnson, seeing the infamy of the
hoax, and the precipice near which he stood, hastened to separate
himself from Lander, and to offer such reparation as he could, by
dictating that unhappy letter of recantation. Lander must have consented
to this step from hopes of patronage; and perhaps the obscure place of
slave-driver in the West Indies, in which he died (after recanting his
recantation), might be the unsatisfactory bait of his needy ambition.
But assuredly Lander could have made out a better case for himself than
that which, under his name, the Doctor addressed to the Bishop; it was a
dark spot in Dr. Johnson's life. A Scotsman, said he, must be a strange
one who would not tell a falsehood in a case where Scotland was
concerned; and we fear that any fable of defamation must have been gross
indeed which Dr. Johnson would not have countenanced against Milton. His
'Life of Milton,' as it now stands, contains some of the grossest
calumnies against that mighty poet which have ever been hazarded; and
some of the deepest misrepresentations are coloured, to the unsuspecting
reader, by an affectation of merriment. But in his 'heart of hearts' Dr.
Johnson detested Milton. Gray, even though, as being little of a meddler
with politics, he furnished no handle to the Doctor for wrath so
unrelenting, was a subject of deep jealousy from his reputed
scholarship. Never did the spite of the Doctor more emblazon itself
than in his review of Gray's lyrical compositions; the very affectation
of prefacing his review by calling the two chief odes 'the wonderful
wonder of wonders' betrays a female spite; and never did the arrogance
of Dr. Johnson's nature flame out so conspicuously as in some of the
phrases used on this occasion. Perhaps it is an instance of
self-inflation absolutely unique where he says, 'My kindness for a man
of letters'; this, it seems, caused him to feel pain at seeing Gray
descending to what he, the Doctor (as a one-sided opinion of his own),
held to be a fantastic foppery. The question we point at is not this
supposed foppery--was it such or not? Milton's having cherished that
'foppery' was a sufficient argument for detesting it. What we fix the
reader's eye upon is, the unparalleled arrogance of applying to Gray
this extreme language of condescending patronage. He really had 'a
kindness' for the little man, and was not ashamed, as some people would
be, to own it; so that it shocked him more than else it would have done,
to see the man disgracing himself in this way.

However, it is probable that all the misstatements of Dr. Johnson, the
invidious impressions, and the ludicrous or injurious anecdotes fastened
_ad libitum_ upon men previously open to particular attacks, never will
be exposed; and for this, amongst other reasons, that sometimes the
facts of the case are irrecoverable, though falsehood may be apparent;
and still more because few men will be disposed to degrade themselves by
assuming a secondary and ministerial office in hanging upon the errors
of any man. Pope was a great favourite with Dr. Johnson, both as an
unreflecting Tory, who travelled the whole road to Jacobitism--thus far
resembling the Doctor himself; secondly, as one who complimented
himself whilst yet a young man, and even whilst wearing a
masque--complimented him under circumstances which make compliments
doubly useful, and make them trebly sincere. If any man, therefore, he
would have treated indulgently Pope: yet his life it is which has mainly
fixed upon Pope that false impression which predominates at this
day--that doubtless intellectually he was a very brilliant little man;
but morally a spiteful, peevish, waspish, narrow-hearted cynic. Whereas
no imputation can be more unfounded. Pope, unless in cases when he had
been maddened by lampoons, was a most benignant creature; and, with the
slightest acknowledgment of his own merit, there never lived a literary
man who was so generously eager to associate others in his own
honours--those even who had no adequate pretensions. If you, reader,
should, like ourselves, have had occasion to investigate Pope's life,
under an intention of recording it more accurately or more
comprehensively than has yet been done, you will feel the truth of what
we are saying. And especially we would recommend to every man, who
wishes to think justly of Pope in this respect, that he should compare
his conduct towards literary competitors with that of Addison. Dr.
Johnson, having partially examined the lives of both, must have been so
far qualified to do justice between them. But justice he has _not_ done;
and to him chiefly we repeat that at this day are owing the false
impressions of Pope's selfish, ungenial, or misanthropic nature; and the
humiliating associations connected with Pope's petty manoeuvring in
trivial domestic affairs, chiefly through Dr. Johnson's means, will
never be obliterated. Let us turn, however, from Dr. Johnson, whom, with
our general respect for his upright nature, it is painful to follow
through circumstances where either jealousy (as sometimes) or credulity
and the love of gossip (as very often) has misled him into gratifying
the taste of the envious at a great sacrifice of dignity to the main
upholders of our literature. These men ought not to have been 'shown up'
for a comic or malicious effect. A nation who value their literature as
we have reason to value ours ought to show their sense of this value by
forgetting the _degrading_ infirmities (not the venial and human
infirmities) of those to whose admirable endowments they owe its
excellence.

Turning away, therefore, from those modes of biography which have
hitherto pursued any vicious extreme, let us now briefly explain our own
ideal of a happier, sounder, and more ennobling biographical art, having
the same general objects as heretofore, but with a more express view to
the benefit of the reader. Looking even at those memoirs which, like
Hayley's of Cowper, have been checked by pathetic circumstances from
fixing any slur or irreverential scandal upon their subject, we still
see a great fault in the mass of biographic records; and what _is_ it?
It is--that, even where no disposition is manifested to copy either the
_éloge_ or the libellous pasquinade, too generally the author appears
_ex officio_ as the constant 'patronus' or legal advocate for the person
recorded. And so he ought, if we understand that sort of advocacy which
in English courts the judge was formerly presumed to exercise on behalf
of the defendant in criminal trials. Before that remarkable change by
which a prisoner was invested with the privilege of employing separate
counsel, the judge was his counsel. The judge took care that no wrong
was done to him; that no false impression was left with the jury; that
the witnesses against him should not be suffered to run on without a
sufficient rigour of cross-examination. But certainly the judge thought
it no part of his duty to make 'the worse appear the better reason'; to
throw dust into the eyes of the jury; or to labour any point of
equivocation for the sake of giving the prisoner an extra chance of
escaping. And, if it is really right that the prisoner, when obviously
guilty, should be aided in evading his probable conviction, then
certainly in past times he had less than justice. For most undoubtedly
no judge would have attempted what we all saw an advocate attempting
about a year ago, that, when every person in court was satisfied of the
prisoner's guilt, from the proof suddenly brought to light of his having
clandestinely left the plate of his murdered victim in a particular
party's safe keeping, at that moment the advocate (though secretly
prostrated by this overwhelming discovery) struggled vainly to fix upon
the honourable witness a foul stigma of self-contradiction and perjury
for the single purpose of turning loose a savage murderer upon society.
If this were not more than justice, then assuredly in all times past the
prisoner had far less. Now, precisely the difference between the
advocacy of the judge, and the advocacy of a special counsel retained by
the prisoner, expresses the difference which we contemplate between the
biographer as he has hitherto protected his hero and that biographer
whom we would substitute. Is he not to show a partiality for his
subject? Doubtless; but hitherto, in those lives which have been
farthest from _éloges_, the author has thought it his duty to uphold the
general system, polity, or principles upon which his subject has acted.
Thus Middleton and all other biographers of Cicero, whilst never
meditating any panegyrical account of that statesman, and oftentimes
regretting his vanity, for instance, have quite as little thought it
allowable to condemn the main political views, theories, and
consequently actions, of Cicero. But why not? Why should a biographer be
fettered in his choice of subjects by any imaginary duty of adopting the
views held by him whose life he records? To make war upon the man, to
quarrel with him in every page, _that_ is quite as little in accordance
with our notions; and we have already explained above our sense of its
hatefulness. For then the question recurs for ever: What necessity
forced you upon a subject whose conduct you thoroughly disapprove? But
let him show the tenderness which is due to a great man even when he
errs. Let him expose the _total_ aberrations of the man, and make this
exposure salutary to the pathetic wisdom of his readers, not alimentary
to their self-conceit, by keeping constantly before their eyes the
excellence and splendour of the man's powers in contrast with his
continued failures. Let him show such patronage to the hero of his
memoir as the English judge showed to the poor prisoner at his bar,
taking care that he should suffer no shadow of injustice from the
witnesses; that the prisoner's own self-defence should in no part be
defeated of its effect by want of proper words or want of proper skill
in pressing the forcible points on the attention of the jury; but
otherwise leaving him to his own real merits in the facts of his case,
and allowing him no relief from the pressure of the hostile evidence but
such as he could find either in counter-evidence or in the intrinsic
weight of his own general character. On the scheme of biography there
would be few persons in any department of life who would be accompanied
to the close by a bowing and obsequious reporter; there would be far
less of uniform approbation presumable in memoirs; but, on the other
hand, there would be exhibited pretty generally a tender spirit of
dealing with human infirmities; a large application of human errors to
the benefit of succeeding generations; and, lastly, there would be an
opening made for the free examination of many lives which are now in a
manner closed against criticism; whilst to each separate life there
would be an access and an invitation laid bare for minds hitherto
feeling themselves excluded from approaching the subject by imperfect
sympathy with the principles and doctrines which those lives were
supposed to illustrate.

But our reformed view of biography would be better explained by a sketch
applied to Cicero's life or to Milton's. In either case we might easily
show, consistently with the exposure of enormous errors, that each was
the wisest man of his own day. And with regard to Cicero in particular,
out of his own letters to Atticus, we might show that every capital
opinion which he held on the politics of Rome in his own day was false,
groundless, contradictory. Yet for all that, we would engage to leave
the reader in a state of far deeper admiration for the man than the
hollow and hypocritical Middleton ever felt himself, or could therefore
have communicated to his readers.

I have ever been disposed to regard as the most venial of deceptions
such impositions as Chatterton had practised on the public credulity.
Whom did he deceive? Nobody but those who well deserved to be deceived,
viz., shallow antiquaries, who pretended to a sort of knowledge which
they had not so much as tasted. And it always struck me as a judicial
infatuation in Horace Walpole, that he, who had so brutally pronounced
the death of this marvellous boy to be a matter of little consequence,
since otherwise he would have come to be hanged for forgery, should
himself, not as a boy under eighteen (and I think under seventeen at the
first issuing of the Rowley fraud), slaving for a few guineas that he
might procure the simplest food for himself, and then buy presents for
the dear mother and sister whom he had left in Bristol, but as an
elderly man, with a clear six thousand per annum,[18] commit a far more
deliberate and audacious forgery than that imputed (if even accurately
imputed) to Chatterton. I know of no published document, or none
published under Chatterton's sanction, in which he formally _declared_
the Rowley poems to have been the compositions of a priest living in
the days of Henry IV., viz., in or about the year 1400. Undoubtedly he
suffered people to understand that he had found MSS. of that period in
the tower of St. Mary Redcliff at Bristol, which he really _had_ done;
and whether he simply tolerated them in running off with the idea that
these particular poems, written on _discoloured_ parchments by way of
colouring the hoax, were amongst the St. Mary treasures, or positively
_said so_, in either view, considering the circumstances of the case, no
man of kind feelings will much condemn him.

But Horace Walpole roundly and audaciously affirmed in the first
sentence of his preface to the poor romance of 'Otranto,' that it had
been translated from the Italian of Onuphrio Muralto, and that the MS.
was still preserved in the library of an English Catholic family;
circumstantiating his needless falsehood by other most superfluous
details. _Needless_, I say, because a book with the Walpole name on the
title-page was as sure of selling as one with Chatterton's obscure name
was at that time sure of _not_ selling. Possibly Horace Walpole did not
care about selling, but wished to measure his own intrinsic power as a
novelist, for which purpose it was a better course to preserve his
_incognito_. But this he might have preserved without telling a
circumstantial falsehood. Whereas Chatterton knew that his only chance
of emerging from the obscure station of a grave-digger's son, and
carrying into comfort the dear female relatives that had half-starved
themselves for _him_ (I speak of things which have since come to my
knowledge thirty-five years after Chatterton and his woes had been
buried in a pauper's coffin), lay in bribing public attention by some
_extrinsic_ attraction. Macpherson had recently engaged the public gaze
by his 'Ossian'--an abortion fathered upon the fourth century after
Christ. What so natural as to attempt other abortions--ideas and
refinements of the eighteenth century--referring themselves to the
fifteenth? Had this harmless hoax succeeded, he would have delivered
those from poverty who delivered _him_ from ignorance; he would have
raised those from the dust who raised _him_ to an aerial height--yes, to
a height from which (but it was after his death), like _Ate_ or _Eris_,
come to cause another Trojan war, he threw down an apple of discord
amongst the leading scholars of England, and seemed to say: 'There, Dean
of Exeter! there, Laureate! there, Tyrwhitt, my man! Me you have
murdered amongst you. Now fight to death for the boy that living you
would not have hired as a shoeblack. My blood be upon you!' Rise up,
martyred blood! rise to heaven for a testimony against these men and
this generation, or else burrow in the earth, and from that spring up
like the stones thrown by Deucalion and Pyrrha into harvests of feud,
into armies of self-exterminating foes. Poor child! immortal child!
Slight were thy trespasses on this earth, heavy was thy punishment, and
it is to be hoped, nay, it is certain, that this disproportion did not
escape the eye which, in the algebra of human actions, estimates _both_
sides of the equation.

Lord Byron was of opinion that people abused Horace Walpole for several
sinister reasons, of which the first is represented to be that he was a
gentleman. Now, I, on the contrary, am of opinion that he was _not_
always a gentleman, as particularly seen in his correspondence with
Chatterton. On the other hand, it is but just to recollect that in
retaining Chatterton's MSS. (otherwise an unfeeling act, yet chiefly
imputable to indolence), the worst aggravation of the case under the
poor boy's construction, viz., that if Walpole had not known his low
rank 'he would not have dared to treat him in that way,' though a very
natural feeling, was really an unfounded one. Horace Walpole (I call him
so, because he was not _then_ Lord Orford) certainly had not been aware
that Chatterton was other than a gentleman by birth and station. The
natural dignity of the boy, which had not condescended to any degrading
applications, misled this practised man of the world. But recurring to
Lord Byron's insinuations as to a systematic design of running Lord
Orford down, I beg to say that I am no party to any such design. It is
not likely that a furious Conservative like myself, who have the
misfortune also to be the most bigoted of Tories, would be so. I
disclaim all participation in any clamour against Lord Orford which may
have arisen on democratic feeling. Feeling the profoundest pity for the
'marvellous boy' of Bristol, and even love, if it be possible to feel
love for one who was in his unhonoured grave before I was born, I resent
the conduct of Lord Orford, in this one instance, as universally the
English public has resented it. But generally, as a writer, I admire
Lord Orford in a very high degree. As a letter-writer, and as a
brilliant sketcher of social aspects and situations, he is far superior
to any French author who could possibly be named as a competitor. And as
a writer of personal or anecdotic history, let the reader turn to
Voltaire's 'Siècle de Louis Quatorze,' in order to appreciate his
extraordinary merit.

Next will occur to the reader the forgery of 'Junius.' Who did _that_?
Oh, villains that have ever doubted since '"Junius" Identified'! Oh,
scamps--oh, pitiful scamps! You, reader, perhaps belong to this wretched
corps. But, if so, understand that you belong to it under false
information. I have heard myriads talk upon this subject. One man said
to me, 'My dear friend, I sympathize with your fury. You are right.
Righter a man cannot be. Rightest of all men you are.' I was
right--righter--rightest! That had happened to few men. But again this
flattering man went on, 'Yes, my excellent friend, right you are, and
evidently Sir Philip Francis was the man. His backer proved it. The day
after his book appeared, if any man had offered me exactly two thousand
to one in guineas, that Sir Philip was _not_ the man, by Jupiter! I
would have declined the bet. So divine, so exquisite, so Grecian in its
perfection, was the demonstration, the _apodeixis_ (or what do you call
it in Greek?), that this brilliant Sir Philip--who, by the way, wore
_his_ order of the Bath as universally as ever he taxed Sir William
Draper with doing--had been the author of "Junius." But here lay the
perplexity of the matter. At the least five-and-twenty excellent men
proved by posthumous friends that they, every mother's son of them, had
also perpetrated "Junius."' 'Then they were liars,' I answered. 'Oh no,
my right friend,' he interrupted, 'not liars at all; amiable men, some
of whom confessed on their death-beds (three to my certain knowledge)
that, alas! they had erred against the law of charity. "_But how?_" said
the clergyman. "Why, by that infernal magazine of sneers and all
uncharitableness, the 'Letters of Junius.'" "Let me understand you,"
said the clergyman: "you wrote 'Junius'?" "Alas! I did," replied A. Two
years after another clergyman said to another penitent, "And so you
wrote 'Junius'?" "Too true, my dear sir. Alas! I did," replied B. One
year later a third penitent was going off, and upon the clergyman
saying, "Bless me, is it possible? Did _you_ write 'Junius'?" he
replied, "Ah, worshipful sir, you touch a painful chord in my
remembrances--I now wish I had not. Alas! reverend sir, I did." Now, you
see,' went on my friend, 'so many men at the New Drop, as you may say,
having with tears and groans taxed themselves with "Junius" as the
climax of their offences, one begins to think that perhaps _all_ men
wrote "Junius."' Well, so far there was reason. But when my friend
contended also that the proofs arrayed in pamphlets proved the whole
alphabet to have written 'Junius,' I could not stand his absurdities.
Death-bed confessions, I admitted, were strong. But as to these wretched
pamphlets, some time or other I will muster them all for a field-day; I
will brigade them, as if the general of the district were coming to
review them; and then, if I do not mow them down to the last man by
opening a treacherous battery of grape-shot, may all my household die
under a fiercer Junius! The true reasons why any man fancies that
'Junius' is an open question must be these three:

First, that they have never read the proofs arrayed against Sir Philip
Francis; this is the general case.

Secondly, that, according to Sancho's proverb, they want better bread
than is made of wheat. They are not content with proofs or absolute
demonstrations. They require you, like the witch of Endor, to raise Sir
Philip from the grave, that they may cross-examine him.

Thirdly (and this is the fault of the able writer who unmasked Sir
Philip), there happened to be the strongest argument that ever picked a
Bramah-lock against the unknown writer of 'Junius'; apply this, and if
it fits the wards, oh, Gemini! my dear friend, but you are
right--righter--rightest; you have caught 'Junius' in a rabbit-snare.

With a single view to the _intellectual_ pretensions of Mr. O'Connell,
let us turn to his latest General Epistle, dated from 'Conciliation
Hall,' on the last day of October. This is no random, or (to use a
pedantic term) _perfunctory_ document; not a document is this to which
indulgence is due. By its subject, not less than by its address, it
stands forth audaciously as a deliberate, as a solemn, as a national
state paper; for its subject is the future political condition of
Ireland under the assumption of Repeal; for its address is, 'To the
People of Ireland.' So placing himself, a writer has it not within his
choice to play the fool; it is not within his competence to tumble or
'come aloft' or play antics as a mountebank; his theme binds him to
decency, his audience to gravity. Speaking, though it be but by the
windiest of fictions, to a nation, is not a man pledged to respectful
language? speaking, though it is but by a chimera as wild as Repeal to a
question of national welfare, a man is pledged to sincerity. Had he
seven devils of mockery and banter within him, for that hour he must
silence them all. The foul fiend must be rebuked, though it were Mahu
and Bohu who should prompt him to buffoonery, when standing at the bar
of nations.

This is the law, this the condition, under which Mr. O'Connell was
speaking when he issued that recent address. Given such a case, similar
circumstances presupposed, he could not evade the obligations which they
impose. From such obligations there is no dispensation to be bought--no,
not at Rome; from the obligations observe, and those obligations, we
repeat, are--sincerity in the first place, and respectful or deferential
language in the second. Such were the duties; now let us look to the
performance. And that we may judge of _that_ with more advantage for
searching and appraising the qualities of this document, permit us to
suggest three separate questions, the first being this: What was the
occasion of the Address? Secondly, what was its ostensible object?
Thirdly, what are the arguments by which, as its means, the paper
travels towards that object?

First, as to the _occasion_ of the Address. We have said that the date,
viz., the 31st of October, is falsified. It was _not_ dated on the 31st
of October, but on or about the seventh day of November. Even that
falsehood, though at first sight trivial, is enough for suspicion. If X,
a known liar, utters a lie at starting, it is not for him to plead in
mitigation the apparent uselessness of the lie, it is for us to presume
out of the fact a use, where the fact exists. A leader in the French
Revolution protested often against bloodshed and other atrocities--not
as being too bad, but, on the contrary, as being too good, too precious
to be wasted upon ordinary occasions. And, on the same principle, we may
be sure that any habitual liar, who has long found the benefit of
falsehoods at his utmost need, will have formed too profound a reverence
for this powerful resource in a moment of perplexity ever to throw away
a falsehood, or to squander upon a caprice of the moment that lie which,
being seasonably employed, might have saved him from confusion. The
artist in lying is not the man to lie gratuitously. From the first,
therefore, satisfied ourselves that there was a lurking motive--the key
to this falsification of date--we paused to search it out. In that we
found little difficulty. For what was the professed object of this
Address? It was to meet and to overthrow two notions here represented as
great popular errors. But why at this time? Wherefore all this heat at
the present moment? Grant that the propositions denounced as erroneous
_were_ so in very deed, why should criminals standing under the shadow
of public vengeance ready to descend, so childishly misuse the interval,
mercifully allowed for their own defence, in reading lectures upon
abstract political speculations, confessedly bearing no relation to any
militant interest now in question? Quite as impertinent it would be,
when called upon for the answer upon 'Guilty or not Guilty?' to read a
section from the Council of Trent, or a rescript from Cardinal
Bellarmine. Yet the more extravagant was the logic of this proceeding,
the more urgent became the presumption of a covert motive, and that
motive we soon saw to be this. Let the reader weigh it, and the good
sense of the man who at such a moment could suffer such a motive to
prevail. Thus it is: when Clontarf was intercepted, and implicitly,
though not formally, all similar meetings were by that one act for ever
prohibited, the first days of terror were naturally occupied with the
panic of the conspirators, and in providing for their personal terrors.
But when the dust of this great uproar began to settle, and objects
again became distinguishable in natural daylight, the first consequence
which struck the affrighted men of the conspiracy was the chilling
effect of the Government policy upon the O'Connell rent; not the weekly
rent, applied nobody knows how, but the annual rent applied to Mr.
O'Connell's _private_ benefit. This was in jeopardy, and on the
following argument: Originally this rent had been levied as a
compensation to Mr. O'Connell in his character of Irish barrister--not
for services rendered or _to be_ rendered, but for current services
continually being rendered in Parliament from session to session, for
expenses incident to that kind of duty, and also as an indemnification
for the consequent loss of fees at the Irish Bar. Yet now, in 1843,
having ceased to attend his duty in Parliament, Mr. O'Connell could no
longer claim in that senatorial character. Such a pretension would be
too gross for the understanding even of a Connaught peasant. And in
_that_ there was a great loss. For the allegation of a Parliamentary
warfare, under the vague idea of pushing forward good bills for Ireland,
or retarding bad ones, had been a pleasant and easy labour to the parish
priests. It was not necessary to horsewhip[19] their flocks too
severely. If all was not clear to 'my children's' understanding, at
least my children had no mutinous demur in a positive shape ready for
service. Recusants there were, and sturdy ones, but they could put no
face on their guilt, and their sin was not contagious. Unhappily, from
this indefinite condition of merit Mr. O'Connell himself had translated
his claim to a very distinct one founded upon a clear, known, absolute
attempt to coerce the Government into passive collusion with prospective
treason. This attempt, said the peasantry, will the Government stand, or
will it not? 'Why, then,' replied the Government, on the 17th of
October, 'we will _not_.'

The aristocracy of Ireland may not have done their duty as regards the
Repeal; it is too certain that they have not, because they have done
nothing at all. But it is also certain that their very uttermost would
have been unavailing for one principal object concerned. Other great
objects, however, might have been attained. Foreign nations might have
been disabused of their silly delusions on the Irish relations to
England, although the Irish peasantry could _not_. The monstrous
impression also upon many English and Scotch parties, that a general
unity of sentiment prevailed in Ireland as to the desirableness of an
independent Parliament--this, this, we say loudly, would have been
dissipated, had every Irish county met by its gentry disavowing and
abominating all sentiments tending towards a purpose so guilty as
political disunion. Yet, in palliation of this most grievous failure,
we, in the spirit of perfect candour, will remind our readers of the
depressing effect too often attending one flagrant wound in any system
of power or means. Let a man lose by a sudden blow--by fire, by
shipwreck, or by commercial failure--a sum of twenty thousand pounds,
that being four-fifths of his entire property, how often it is found
that mere dejection of mind will incapacitate him from looking
cheerfully after the remaining fifth! And this though it is now become
far more essential to his welfare; and, secondly, upon a motion
tending upwards and not downwards, he would have regarded five
thousand pounds as a precious treasure worthy of his efforts, whether
for protection or for improvement. Something analogous to this weighs
down the hearty exertions of the Irish gentry. Met at the very
threshold, affronted at starting, by this insufferable tyranny of
priestly interference--humiliated and stung to the heart by the
consciousness that those natural influences which everywhere else
settle indefeasibly upon property, are in Ireland intercepted,
filched, violently robbed and pocketed by a body of professional
nuisances sprung almost universally from paupers--thus disinherited of
their primary rights, thus pillaged, thus shorn like Samson of those
natural ornaments in which resided their natural strength, feeling
themselves (like that same Samson in the language of Milton) turned
out to the scorn of their countrymen as 'tame wethers' ridiculously
fleeced and mutilated--they droop, they languish as to all public
spirit; and whilst by temperament, by natural endowment, by continual
intercourse with the noble aristocracy of Britain (from whom also they
are chiefly descended), they _should_ be amongst the leading
chivalries of Europe, in very fact they are, for political or social
purposes, the most powerless gentry in existence. Acting in a
corporate capacity, they can do nothing. The malignant planet of this
low-born priesthood comes between them and the peasantry, eclipsing
oftentimes the sunshine of their comprehensive beneficence, and
_always_ destroying their power to discountenance[20] evil-doers. Here
is the sad excuse. But, for all that, we must affirm that, if the
Irish landed gentry do not yet come forward to retrieve the ground
which they have forfeited by inertia, history will record them as
passive colluders with the Dublin repealers. The evil is so
operatively deep, looking backward or forward, that we have purposely
brought it forward in a second aspect, viz., as contrasted with the
London press. For the one, as we have been showing, there is a strong
plea in palliation; for the other there is none.

Let us be frank. This is what we affirm, that it was, it is, it will be
hereafter, within the powers of the London press to have extinguished
the Repeal or any similar agitation; they could have done this, and this
they have _not_ done. But let us also not be misunderstood. Do we say
this in a spirit of disrespect? Are we amongst the parties who (when
characterizing the American press) infamously say, 'Let us, however,
look homewards to our own press, and be silent for very shame'? Are we
the people to join the vicious correspondent of an evening paper whom
but a week ago we saw denouncing the editor of the _Examiner_ newspaper
as a public nuisance, and recommending him as a fit subject of some
degrading punishment, for no better reason than that he had exercised
his undoubted right of exposing delinquencies or follies in a garrulous
lord? Far be such vilenesses from us. We honour the press of this
country. We know its constitution, and we know the mere impossibility
(were it only from the great capital required) that any but men of
honour and sensibilities and conspicuous talent, and men brilliantly
accomplished in point of education, should become writers or editors of
a _leading_ journal, or indeed of any daily journal. Here and there may
float _in gurgite vasto_ some atrocious paper lending itself upon system
to the villainies of private slander. But such a paper is sure to be an
inconsiderable one in the mere sense of property, and therefore,
by a logical consequence in our frame of society, _every_ way
inconsiderable--rising without effort, sinking without notice. In fact,
the whole staff and establishment of newspapers have risen in social
consideration within our own generation; and at this moment not merely
proprietors and editors, but reporters and other ministerial agents to
these vast engines of civility, have all ascended in their superior
orders to the highest levels of authentic responsibility.

We make these acknowledgments in the mere spirit of equity, and because
we disdain to be confounded with those rash persons who talk glibly of a
'licentious press' through their own licentious ignorance. Than
ignorance nothing is so licentious for rash saying or for obstinate
denying. The British press is _not_ licentious; neither in London nor in
Edinburgh is it ever licentious; and there is much need that it should
be otherwise, having at this time so unlimited a power over the public
mind. But the very uprightness of the leading journalists, and all the
other elements of their power, do but constitute the evil, do but
aggravate the mischief, where they happen to go astray; yes, in every
case where these journalists miss the narrow path of thoughtful
prudence. They _do_ miss it occasionally; they must miss it; and we
contend that they _have_ missed it at present. What they have done that
they ought _not_ to have done. Currency, buoyancy, they ought _not_ to
have impressed upon sedition, upon conspiracy, upon treason. Currency,
buoyancy, they _have_ impressed upon sedition, upon conspiracy, upon
treason.

As to Mr. O'Connell himself, it is useless, and it argues some thick
darkness of mind, to remonstrate or generally to address any arguments
from whatsoever quarter, which either appeal to a sense of truth, which,
secondly, manifest inconsistencies, or, thirdly, which argue therein a
tendency ruinous to himself. Let us think. Burke asserted of himself,
and to our belief truly, that having at different periods set his face
in different directions--now to the east, now to the west, now pointing
to purposes of relaxation or liberality, now again to purposes of
coercive and popular restraint--he had notwithstanding been uniform, if
measured upon a higher scale. Transcending objects, coinciding neither
instantly with the first, nor except by accident with the last, but
indifferently aided by aristocratic forces or by democratic, shifting
weights which sometimes called for accessories of gravity, sometimes for
subtraction, mighty fluctuating wheels which sometimes needed flywheels
to moderate or harmonize, sometimes needed concurrent wheels to urge or
aggravate their impetus--these were the powers which he had found
himself summoned to calculate, to check, to support, the vast algebraic
equation of government; for this he had strengthened substantially by
apparent contrarieties of policy; and in a system of watch-work so
exquisite as to vary its fine balances eternally, eternally he had
consulted by redressing the errors emergent, by varying the poise in
order that he might _not_ vary the equipoise, by correcting
inequalities, or by forestalling extremes. That was a man of heroic
build, and of him it might be said at his death, 'Truly this man was a
son of Anak.' Now, of Mr. O'Connell a man might affirm something
similar; that as with regard to Edmund Burke it is altogether useless to
detect contradictions in form, seeing that he knows of this, that he
justifies this, glories in this, vehemently demands praise for this
contradiction, as all discord is harmony not understood, planned in the
letter and overruled in the spirit; so may O'Connell say, 'Gentlemen,
grubs, reptiles, vermin, trouble not yourselves to find out
contradictions or discords in my conduct; vex not your slender faculties
by arraying hosts of promises that defeat promises, or principles that
destroy principles--you shall not need to labour; I will make you a
present of three huge canisters laden and running over with the flattest
denials in one breath of that which I affirmed in another. But, like
Edmund Burke, I register my conduct by another table and by its final
result. On the dial which you see, the hands point thus and thus; but
upon a higher and transcendent dial these fingers do but precipitate or
retard one gigantic hand, pointing always and monotonously to the unity
of a perfect selfishness. The everlasting tacking in my course gives me
often the air of retrograding and losing; but, in fact, these
retrogressions are momentary, these losings of my object are no more
than seeming, are still but the same stealthy creeping up under cover of
frequent compliances with the breeze that happens to thwart me, towards
the one eternal pole of my own self-interest; that is the pole-star
which only never sets, and I flatter myself that amidst vast apparent
wanderings or multiplied divergences there will be detected by the eye
of the philosopher a consistency in family objects which is absolute, a
divine unity of selfishness.'

This we do not question. But to will is not to do; and Mr. O'Connell,
with a true loyalty to his one object of private aims, has _not_
maintained the consistency of his policy. All men know that he has
adventured within the limits of conspiracy; that could not be for his
benefit. He has touched even the dark penumbra of treason; that could
not but risk the sum of his other strivings. But he who has failed for
himself in a strife so absolute, for that only must be distrusted by
his countrymen.

To speak in the simplicity of truth, caring not for party or partisan,
is not the France of this day, the France which has issued from that
great furnace of the Revolution, a better, happier, more hopeful France
than the France of 1788? Allowing for any evil, present or reversionary,
in the political aspects of France, that may yet give cause for anxiety,
can a wise man deny that from the France of 1840, under Louis Philippe
of Orleans, ascends to heaven a report of far happier days from the sons
and daughters of poverty than from the France of Louis XVI.? Personally
that sixteenth Louis was a good king, sorrowing for the abuses in the
land, and willing (at least, after affliction had sharpened his
reflecting conscience), had that choice been allowed him, to have
redeemed them by any personal sacrifice. But that was not possible.
Centuries of misrule are not ransomed by an individual ruin; and had it
been possible that the dark genius of his family, the same who once
tolled funeral knells in the ears of the first Bourbon, and called him
out as a martyr hurrying to meet his own sacrifice--could we suppose
this gloomy representative of his family destinies to have met him in
some solitary apartment of the Tuileries or Versailles, some twilight
gallery of ancestral portraits, he could have met him with the purpose
of raising the curtain from before the long series of his household
woes--from him the king would have learned that no personal ransom could
be accepted for misgovernment so ancient. Leviathan is not so tamed.
Arrears so vast imply a corresponding accountability, corresponding by
its amount, corresponding by its personal subjects. Crown and
people--all had erred; all must suffer. Blood must flow, tears must be
shed through a generation; rivers of lustration must be thrown through
that Augean accumulation of guilt.

And exactly there, it is supposed, lay the error of Burke; the compass
of the penalty, the arch which it traversed, must bear some proportion
to that of the evil which had produced it.

When I referred to the dark genius of the family who once tolled funeral
knells in the ears of the first Bourbon, I meant, of course, the first
who sat upon the throne of France, viz., Henri Quatre. The allusion is
to the last hours of Henry's life, to the remarkable prophecies which
foreran his death, to their remarkable fulfilment, and (what is more
remarkable than all beside) to his self-surrender, in the spirit of an
unresisting victim, to a bloody fate which he regarded as inexorably
doomed. This king was not the good prince whom the French hold out to
us; not even the accomplished, the chivalrous, the elevated prince to
whom history points for one of her models. French and ultra-French must
have been the ideal of the good or the noble to which he could have
approximated in the estimate of the most thoughtless. He had that sort
of military courage which was, and is, more common than weeds. In all
else he was a low-minded man, vulgar in his thoughts, most unprincely in
his habits. He was even worse than that: wicked, brutal, sensually
cruel. And his wicked minister, Sully, than whom a more servile mind
never existed, illustrates in one passage his own character and his
master's by the apology which he offers for Henry's having notoriously
left many illegitimate children to perish of hunger, together with their
too-confiding mothers. What? That in the pressure of business he really
forgot them. Famine mocked at last the deadliest offence. His own
innocent children, up and down France, because they were illegitimate,
their too-confiding mothers, because they were weak and friendless by
having for his sake forfeited the favour of God and man, this amiable
king had left to perish of hunger. They _did_ perish; mother and infant.
A cry ascended against the king. Even in sensual France such atrocities
could not utterly sink to the ground. But what says the apologetic
minister? Astonished that anybody could think of abridging a king's
license in such particulars, he brushes away the whole charge as so much
ungentlemanly impertinence, disdaining any further plea than the
pressure of business, which so naturally accounted for the royal
inattention or forgetfulness in these little affairs. Observe that this
pressure of business never was such that the king could not find time
for pursuing these intrigues and multiplying these reversions of woe.
What enormities! A king (at all times of Navarre, and for half his life
of France) suffers his children to die of hunger, consigns their mothers
to the same fate, but aggravated by remorse and by the spectacle of
their perishing infants! These clamours could not penetrate to the
Louvre, but they penetrated to a higher court, and were written in books
from which there is no erasure allowed. So much for the vaunted
'generosity' of Henry IV. As to another feature of the chivalrous
character, elegance of manners, let the reader consult the report of an
English ambassador, a man of honour and a gentleman, Sir George Carew.
It was published about the middle of the last century by the
indefatigable Birch, to whom our historic literature is so much
indebted, and it proves sufficiently that this idol of Frenchmen allowed
himself in habits so coarse as to disgust the most creeping of his own
courtiers; such that even the blackguards of a manly nation would revolt
from them as foul and self-dishonouring. Deep and permanent is the
mischief wrought in a nation by false models; and corresponding is the
impression, immortal the benefit, from good ones. The English people
have been the better for their Alfred, that pathetic ideal of a good
king, through a space of now nearly a thousand years. The French are the
worse to this hour in consequence of Francis I. and Henry IV. And note
this, that even the spurious merit of the two French models can be
sustained only by disguises, by suppressions, by elaborate varnishings;
whereas the English prince is offered to our admiration with a
Scriptural simplicity and a Scriptural fidelity, not as some gay legend
of romance, some Telemachus of Fénelon, but as one who had erred,
suffered, and had been purified; as a shepherd that had gone astray, and
saw that through his transgressions the flock also had been scattered.

Two facts on which a sound estimate of the Roman corn-trade depends are
these: first, the very important one, that it was not Rome in the sense
of the Italian peninsula which relied upon foreign corn, but in the
narrowest sense Rome the city; as respected what we now call Lombardy,
Florence, Genoa, etc., Rome did not disturb the ancient agriculture. The
other fact offers, perhaps, a still more important consideration. Rome
was latterly a most populous city--we are disposed to agree with
Lipsius, that it was four times as populous as most moderns esteem--most
certainly it bore a higher ratio to the total Italy than any other
capital (even London) has since borne to the territory over which it
presided. Consequently it will be argued that in such a ratio must the
foreign importations of Rome, even in the limited sense of Rome the
city, have operated more destructively upon the domestic agriculture.
Grant that not Italy, but Rome, was the main importer of foreign grain,
still, if Rome to all Italy were as one to four in population, which
there is good reason to believe it was, then even upon that distinction
it will be insisted that the Roman importation crushed one-fourth of the
native agriculture. Now, this we deny. Some part of the African and
Egyptian grain was but a substitution for the Sardinian, and so far made
no difference to Italy in ploughs, but only in _denarii_. But the main
consideration of all is, that the Italian grain was not withdrawn from
the vast population of Rome--this is _not_ the logic of the case--no; on
the contrary, the vast population of Rome arose and supervened as a
consequence upon the opening of the foreign Alexandrian corn trade. It
was not Rome that quirted the home agriculture. Rome, in the full sense,
never would have existed without foreign supplies. If, therefore, Rome,
by means of foreign grain, rose from four hundred thousand heads to four
millions, then it follows that (except as to the original demand for the
four hundred thousand) not one plough was disused in Italy that ever had
been used. Whilst, even with regard to the original demand of the four
hundred thousand, by so much of the Egyptian grain as had been a mere
substitution for Sardinian no effect whatever could have followed to
Italian agriculture.

Here, therefore, we see the many limitations which arise to the modern
doctrine upon the destructive agricultural consequences of the Roman
corn trade. Rome may have prevented the Italian agriculture from
expanding, but she could not have caused it to decline.[21] Now, let us
see how far this Roman corn trade affected the Roman recruiting service.
It is alleged that agriculture declined under the foreign corn trade,
and that for this reason ploughmen declined. But if we have shown cause
for doubting whether agriculture declined, or only did not increase,
then we are at liberty to infer that ploughmen did not decline, but only
did not increase. Even of the real and not imaginary ploughmen at any
time possessed by Italy, too many in the south were slaves, and
therefore ineligible for the legionary service, except in desperate
intestine struggles like the Social war or the Servile. Rome could not
lose for her recruiting service any ploughmen but those whom she had
really possessed; nor out of those whom really she possessed any that
were slaves; nor out of those whom (not being slaves) she _might_ have
used for soldiers could it be said that she was liable to any absolute
loss except as to those whom ordinarily she _did_ use as soldiers, and
preferred to use in circumstances of free choice.

These points premised, we go on to say that no craze current amongst
learned men has more deeply disturbed the truth of history than the
notion that 'Marsi' and 'Peligni,' or other big-boned Italian rustics,
ever by choice constituted the general or even the favourite recruiting
fund of the Roman republic. In thousands of books we have seen it
asserted or assumed that the Romans triumphed so extensively chiefly
because their armies were composed of Roman or kindred blood. This is
false. Not the material, but the military system, of the Romans was the
true key to their astonishing successes. In the time of Hannibal a Roman
consul relied chiefly, it is true, upon Italian recruits, because he
could seldom look for men of other blood. And it is possible enough that
the same man, Fabius or Marcellus, if he had been sent abroad as a
proconsul, might find his choice even then in what formerly had been his
necessity. In some respects it is probable that the Italian rustic of
true Italian blood was at that period the best raw material[22] easily
procured for the legionary soldier. But circumstances altered; as the
range of war expanded to the East it became far too costly to recruit in
Italy; nor, if it had been less costly, could Italy have supplied the
waste. Above all, with the advantages of the Roman military system, no
particular physical material was required for making good soldiers. For
these reasons it was that, after the Levant was permanently occupied by
the Romans, where any legion had been originally stationed _there_ it
continued to be stationed, and _there_ it was recruited, and, unless in
some rare emergency of a critical war arising at a distance, _there_ it
was so continually recruited, that in the lapse of a generation it
contained hardly any Roman or Italian blood in its composition, like the
Attic ship which had been repaired with cedar until it retained no
fragment of its original oak. Thus, the legion stationed at Antioch
became entirely Syrian; that stationed at Alexandria, Grecian, Jewish,
and, in a separate sense, Alexandrine. Cæsar, it is notorious, raised
one entire legion of Gauls (distinguished by the cognizance upon the
helmet of the _lark_, whence commonly called the legion of the
_Alauda_). But he recruited all his legions in Gaul. In Spain the armies
of Assanius and Petreius, who surrendered to Cæsar under a convention,
consisted chiefly of Spaniards (not _Hispanienses_, or Romans born in
Spain, but _Hispani_, Spaniards by blood); at Pharsalia a large part of
Cæsar's army were Gauls, and of Pompey's it is well known that many even
amongst the legions contained no Europeans at all, but (as Cæsar
seasonably reminded his army) consisted of vagabonds from every part of
the East. From all this we argue that _S.P.Q.R._ did not depend latterly
upon native recruiting. And, in fact, they did not need to do so; their
system and discipline would have made good soldiers out of mop-handles,
if (like Lucian's magical mop-handles) they could only have learned to
march and to fill buckets with water at the word of command.

We see, too, the secret power and also the secret political wisdom of
Christianity in another instance. Those public largesses of grain,
which, in old Rome, commenced upon principles of ambition and of
factious encouragement to partisans, in the new Rome of Constantinople
were propagated for ages under the novel motive of Christian charity to
paupers. This practice has been condemned by the whole chorus of
historians who fancy that from this cause the domestic agriculture
languished, and that a bounty was given upon pauperism. But these are
reveries of literary men. That particular section of rural industry
which languished in Italy, did so by a reaction from _rent_ in the
severe modern sense. The grain imported from Sardinia, from Africa the
province, and from Egypt, was grown upon soils less costly, because with
equal cost more productive. The effect upon Italy from bringing back
any considerable portion of this provincial corn-growth[23] to her
domestic districts would have been suddenly to develop rent upon a large
series of evils, and to load the provincial grain as well as the
home-grown--the cheap provincial as well as the dear home-grown--with
the whole difference of these new costs. Neither is the policy of the
case at all analogous to our own at the moment. In three circumstances
it differs essentially:

First, provinces are not foreigners; colonies are not enemies. An exotic
corn-trade could not for Rome do the two great injuries which assuredly
it would do for England; it could not transfer the machinery of opulence
to a hostile and rival state; it could not invest a jealous competitor
with power suddenly to cut off supplies that had grown into a necessity,
and thus to create in one month a famine or an insurrection. Egypt had
neither the power nor any prospect of the power to act as an independent
state towards Rome; the transfer to Egypt of the Roman agriculture,
supposing it to have been greater than it really was, could have
operated but like a transfer from Norfolk to Yorkshire.

Secondly, as respected Italy, the foreign grain _did not enter the same
markets as the native_. Either one or the other would have lost its
advantage, and the natural bounty which it enjoyed from circumstances,
by doing so. Consequently the evils of an artificial scale, where grain
raised under one set of circumstances fixes or modifies the price for
grain raised under a different set of circumstances, were unknown in the
Italian markets. But these evils by a special machinery, viz., the
machinery of good and bad seasons, are aggravated for a modern state
intensely, whenever she depends too much upon alien stores; and
specifically they are aggravated by the fact that both grains _enter the
same market_, so that the one by too high a price is encouraged
unreasonably, the other by the same price (too low for opposite
circumstances) is depressed ruinously as regards coming years; whence in
the end two sets of disturbances--one set frequently from the _present_
seasons, and a second set from the way in which these are made to act
upon the _future_ markets.

Thirdly, the Roman corn-trade did not of necessity affect her military
service injuriously, and for this reason, that rural economy did not of
necessity languish because agriculture languished locally; some other
culture, as of vineyards, _oliveta_, orchards, pastures, replaced the
declining culture of grain; if ploughmen were fewer, other labourers
were more. It is forgotten, besides, that the decline of Italian
agriculture, never more than local, was exceedingly gradual; for two
hundred and fifty years before the Christian era Italy never _had_
depended exclusively upon herself. Sardinia and Sicily, at her own
doors, were her granaries; consequently the change never _had_ been that
abrupt change which modern writers imagine.

But let us indulge in the luxury of confirming what we have said by the
light of contrast. Suppose the circumstances changed, suppose them
reversed, and then all those evil consequence sought to take effect
which in the case of Rome we have denied. Now, it happened that they
_were_ reversed; not, indeed, for Rome, who had been herself ruined as
metropolis of the West before the effects of a foreign corn-dependence
could unfold themselves, but for her daughter and rival in the East.
Early in the seventh century, near to the very crisis of the Hegira
(which dates from the Christian year 622), Constantinople, Eastern Rome,
suddenly became acquainted with the panic of famine. In one hour perhaps
this change fell upon the imperial city, and, but for the imperial
granaries, not the panic of famine, but famine itself, would have
surprised the imperial city; for the suddenness of the calamity would
have allowed no means of searching out or raising up a relief to it. At
that time the greatest man who ever occupied the chair of the Eastern
Cæsars, viz., Heraclius,[24] was at the head of affairs. But the
perplexity was such that no man could face it. On the one hand
Constantine, the founder of this junior Rome, had settled upon the
houses of the city a claim for a weekly _dimensum_ of grain. Upon this
they relied; so that doubly the Government stood pledged--first, for the
importation of corn that should be sufficient; secondly, for its
distribution upon terms as near to those of Constantine as possible.
But, on the other hand, Persia (the one great stationary enemy of the
empire) had in the year 618 suddenly overrun Egypt; grain became
deficient on the banks of the Nile--had it even been plentiful, to so
detested an enemy it would have been denied--and thus, without a month's
warning, the supply, which had not failed since the inauguration of the
city in 330, ceased in one week. The people of this mighty city were
pressed by the heaviest of afflictions. The emperor, under false
expectations, was tempted into making engagements which he could not
keep; the Government, at a period which otherwise and for many years to
come was one of awful crisis, became partially insolvent; the shepherd
was dishonoured, the flocks were ruined; and had that Persian armament
which about ten years later laid siege to Constantinople then stood at
her gates, the Cross would have been trampled on by the fire-worshipping
idolater, and the barbarous Avar would have desolated the walls of the
glorified Cæsar who first saw Christ marching in the van of Roman
armies. Such an iliad of woes would have expanded itself _seriatim_, and
by a long procession, from the one original mischief of depending for
daily bread upon those who might suddenly become enemies or tools of
enemies. England! read in the distress of that great Cæsar,[25] who may
with propriety be called the earliest (as he was the most prosperous) of
Crusaders, read in the internal struggle of his heart--too conscious
that dishonour had settled upon his purple--read in the degradations
which he traversed as some fiery furnace (yet not unsinged), the
inevitable curses which await nations who sacrifice, for a momentary
convenience of bread, sacrifice for a loaf, the charter of their
supremacy! This is literally to fulfil the Scriptural case of selling a
birthright for a mess of pottage.

For England we may say of this case--_Transeat in exemplum!_

Great Britain, on the contrary, is limited in her recruiting-grounds by
modern political relations as respects Europe: she _has_ formed an
excellent foreign corps long ago in the Mediterranean; a Hessian corps
in America; an admirable Hanoverian legion during the late war. But
circumstances too often prevent her relying (as the Romans did) on the
perfection of her military _system_ so far as to dispense with native
materials; except, indeed, in the East, where the Roman principle is
carried out to the widest extent, needing only one-tenth of British by
way of model and inspiration under circumstances of peculiar trial! In
African stations also, in the West Indies and on the American continent
(as in Honduras), England proceeds (though insufficiently) upon this
fine Roman principle, making her theory, her discipline, and the network
of her rules do the work of her own too costly hands. She, like Rome,
finds the benefit of her fine system chiefly in the dispensation which
it facilitates from working with any exhaustible fund of means.
Excellent must be that workmanship which can afford to be careless about
its materials; yet still--where naturally and essentially it must be
said that _materiem superabat opus_, because one section of our martial
service moves by nautical soldiers, and with respect to the other half
because it is necessary to meet European troops by men of British
blood--we cannot, for European purposes, look to any other districts
than our own native _officinæ_ of population. The Life Guards (1st
regiment) and the Blues (2nd) recruit chiefly, or did so thirty years
ago, in Yorkshire. This is a manufacturing county, though in a mode of
manufacturing which escapes many evils of the factory system. And
generally we are little disposed pedantically to disparage towns as
funds of a good soldiery. Men of mighty bone and thews, sons of Anak, to
our own certain knowledge, arise in Kendal, Wakefield, Bradford and
Leeds; huge men, by thousands, amongst the spinners and weavers of
Glasgow, Paisley, etc., well able to fight their way through battalions
of clod-hoppers whose talk is of oxen. But, unless in times subject to
special distress, it is not so easy to tempt away the weaver from his
loom as the delver from his spade. We believe the reason to be, that the
monotony of a rustic life is more oppressive to those who have limited
resources than the corresponding monotony of a town life. For this
reason, and for many others, it is certain--and perhaps (unless we get
to fighting with steam-men) it will continue to be certain through
centuries--that, for the main staple of her armies and her navies,
England must depend upon the quality of her bold peasantry and noble
yeomanry; for we must remember that, of those huge-limbed men who are
found in the six northern counties of England and in the Scottish
Lowlands, of those elegantly-formed men who are found in Devonshire,
Cornwall, etc., of those _hardy_ men (a feature in human physics still
more important) who are found in every district--if many are now
resident in towns, most of them originated in rustic life; and from
rustic life it is that the reservoir of towns is permanently fed. Rome
was, England never will be, independent of her rural population. Rome
never had a yeomanry, Rome never had a race of country gentlemen;
England has both upon a scale so truly noble that it will be the
simplest expression of that nobility to say, pointing to our villages,
'Behold the cradle of our army!' as inversely to say, pointing to that
army: 'Behold the manhood of our villages!' As regards Rome, from the
bisection of the Roman territory into two several corn districts
depending upon a separate agriculture, it results that _her_ wealth
could not be defeated and transferred; secondly, it results from the
total subjection of Egypt, that no embargo _could_ be laid on the
harvests of the Nile, and no famine _could_ be organized against Rome;
thirdly, it results that the Roman military system was thus not liable
to be affected by any dependency upon foreign grain. On the argument
that this dependency had _always_ been proceeding gradually in Italy, so
as virtually to reimburse itself by _vicarious_ culture, whereas in
England the transition from independency to dependency, being
accomplished (if at all) in one day by Act of Parliament, would be
ruinously abrupt; and also on the argument _B_, that Rome, if slowly
losing any recruiting districts at home, found compensatory districts
all round the Mediterranean, whilst England could find no such
compensatory districts--we deny that the circumstances of the Roman corn
trade have _ever_ been stated truly; and we expect the thanks of our
readers for drawing their attention to this outline of the points which
essentially differenced it from the modern corn trade of England.
England must, but Rome could _not_, reap from a foreign corn dependency:
firstly, ruinous disturbance to the natural expansions of her wealth;
secondly, famine by intervals for her vast population; thirdly,
impoverishment to her recruiting service. These are the dreadful evils
(some uniform, some contingent) which England would inherit of her
native agriculture, but which Rome escaped under that partial transfer,
never really accomplished. Meantime, let the reader remember that it is
Rome, and not England--Rome historically, not England politically--which
forms the _object_ of our exposure. England is but the _means_ of the
illustration.

In our own days wars in their ebbs and flows are but another name for
the resources of the national exchequer, or expressions of its
artificial facilities for turning those resources to account. The great
artifice of anticipation applied to national income--an artifice sure to
follow where civilization has expanded, and which would have arisen to
Rome had her civilization been either (_A_) completely developed, or
(_B_) expanded originally from a true radix--has introduced a new era
into national history. The man who, having had property, invests in the
Funds, and divides between his grandchildren and the five subsequent
generations what will yield them subsistence, is the author of an
expansive improvement which has been enjoyed by all in turn, and with
more fixed assurance in the last case than in the first. He is a public
benefactor in more ways than appears on the surface: he takes the most
efficient guarantees against needless wars.

Captain Jenkins's ears[26] might have been redeemed at a less price; but
still the war taught a lesson, which, if avoidable at that instant, was
certainly blamable; but it had its use in enforcing on other nations the
conviction that England washed out insult with retribution, and for
every drop of blood wantonly spilt demanded an ocean in return. Perhaps
you will say _this_ was no great improvement on the old. No; not in
_appearance_, it may be; but that was because war had to open a field
which mere diplomacy, unsupported by the sword, could not open, and
secured what we may well call a _moral_ result in the eye of the whole
world, which diplomacy could not secure in our guilty Europe. But was
that, you ask, a condition to be contemplated with complete
satisfaction? No; nor is it right that it should. But the dawn of a new
era is approaching, for which that may have done its installment of
preparation. Not that war will cease for many generations, but that it
will continually move more in greater subjection to national laws and
Christian opinion. Nevermore will it be excited by mere court intrigue,
or even by ministerial necessities. No more will a quarrel between two
ladies about a pair of gloves, or a fit of ill-temper in a prince toward
his minister, call forth the dread scourge by way of letting off
personal irritation or redressing the balance of parties.

_Funding_, therefore, was a great step in advance; and even already we
have only to look into the Exchequer in order to read the possibilities,
the ebbs and flows of war beforehand. This consideration of money, it is
true--even as the sinews of war--was not so great in ancient history.
And the reason is evident. Kings did not then go to war _by_ money, but
_for_ money. They did not look into the Exchequer for the means of a
campaign, but they looked into a campaign for the means of an Exchequer.
Yet even in these nations, more of their history, of their doings and
sufferings, lay in their economy than anywhere else. The great Oriental
phantoms, such as the Pharaohs and the Sargons, did, it is true, bring
nations to war without much more care for the commissariat department
than is given in the battles of the Kites and Daws. Yet even there the
political economy made itself felt, obscurely and indirectly it may be,
but really and effectively, acting by laws that varied their force
rather to the eye than to the understanding, and presented indeed a
final restraining force to these kings also. For examine these wars,
fabulous as they are; look into the when, the whence, the how; into the
duration of the campaigns, into their objects, and into the quality of
the troops, into the circumstances under which they were trained and
fought, and this will abundantly appear.

Certainly, the commissariat which we do by foresight, they did by brute
efforts of power; but the leading economical laws which are now clear to
us, and which, with full perception of their inevitable operation, we
take into account, made themselves felt in the last result if only then
blindly realized; and in the fact that these laws are now clearly
apprehended lies the prevailing reason that modern wars must, on the
side alike of the commissariat and of social effects in various
directions, be widely different from war in ancient times.

Anecdotes illustrative of manners, above all of national manners, will
be found on examination, in a far larger proportion than might be
supposed, rank falsehoods. Malice is the secret foundation of all
anecdotes in that class. The ordinary course of such falsehoods is, that
first of all some stranger and alien to those feelings which have
prompted a particular usage--incapable, therefore, of entering fully
into its spirit or meaning--tries to exhibit its absurdity more forcibly
by pushing it into an extreme or trying case. Coming himself from some
gross form of _Kleinstädtigkeit_, where no restraints of decorum exist,
and where everybody speaks to everybody, he has been utterly confounded
by the English ceremony of 'introduction,' when enforced as the _sine
quâ non_ condition of personal intercourse. If England is right, then
how clownishly wrong must have been his own previous circles! If England
is not ridiculously fastidious, then how bestially grovelling must be
the spirit of social intercourse in his own land! But no man reconciles
himself to this view of things in a moment. He kicks even against his
own secret convictions. He blushes with shame and anger at the thought
of his own family perhaps brought suddenly into collision with polished
Englishmen; he thrills with wrath at the recollection of having himself
trespassed upon this code of restriction at a time when he was yet
unwarned of its existence. In this temper he is little qualified to
review such a regulation with reason and good sense. He seeks to make it
appear ridiculous. He presses it into violent cases for which it was
never intended. He supposes a case where some fellow-creature is
drowning. How would an Englishman act, how _could_ he act, even under
such circumstances as these? _We_ know, we who are blinded by no spite,
that as a bar to personal communication or to any interchange of good
offices under appeals so forcible as these, this law of formal
presentation between the parties never did and never will operate. The
whole motive to such a law gives way at once.

Some years ago I had occasion to remark that a new era was coming on by
hasty strides for national politics, a new organ was maturing itself for
public effects. Sympathy--how great a power is that! Conscious
sympathy--how immeasurable! Now, for the total development of this
power, _time_ is the most critical of elements. Thirty years ago, when
the Edinburgh mail took ninety-six hours in its transit from London, how
slow was the reaction of the Scottish capital upon the English! Eight
days for the _diaulos_[27] of the journey, and two, suppose, for getting
up a public meeting, composed a cycle of _ten_ before an act received
its commentary, before a speech received its refutation, or an appeal
its damnatory answer. What was the consequence? The sound was
disconnected from its echo, the kick was severed from the
recalcitration, the '_Take you this!_' was unlinked from the '_And take
you that!_' Vengeance was defeated, and sympathy dissolved into the air.
But now mark the difference. A meeting on Monday in Liverpool is by
possibility reported in the London _Standard_ of Monday evening. On
Tuesday, the splendid merchant, suppose his name were Thomas Sands, who
had just sent a vibration through all the pulses of Liverpool, of
Manchester, of Warrington, sees this great rolling fire (which hardly
yet has reached his own outlying neighbourhoods) taken up afar off,
redoubled, multiplied, peal after peal, through the vast artilleries of
London. Back comes rolling upon him the smoke and the thunder--the
defiance to the slanderer and the warning to the offender--groans that
have been extorted from wounded honour, aspirations rising from the
fervent heart--truth that had been hidden, wisdom that challenged
co-operation.

And thus it is that all the nation, thus 'all that mighty heart,'
through nine hundred miles of space, from Sutherlandshire by London to
the myrtle climate of Cornwall, has become and is ever more becoming one
infinite harp, swept by the same breeze of sentiment, reverberating the
same sympathies

    'Here, there, and in all places at one time.'[28]

Time, therefore, that ancient enemy of man and his frail purposes, how
potent an ally has it become in combination with great mechanic changes!
Many an imperfect hemisphere of thought, action, desire, that could not
heretofore unite with its corresponding hemisphere, because separated by
ten or fourteen days of suspense, now moves electrically to its
integration, hurries to its complement, realizes its orbicular
perfection, spherical completion, through that simple series of
improvements which to man have given the wings and _talaria_ of Gods,
for the heralds have dimly suggested a future rivalship with the
velocities of light, and even now have inaugurated a race between the
child of mortality and the North Wind.

We are not to suppose the rebel, or, more properly, corrupted
angels--the rebellion being in the result, not in the intention (which
is as little conceivable in an exalted spirit as that man should prepare
to make war on gravitation)--were essentially evil. Whether a principle
of evil--essential evil--anywhere exists can only be guessed. So gloomy
an idea is shut up from man. Yet, if so, possibly the angels and man
were nearing it continually.

Possibly after a certain approach to that Maelstrom recall might be
hopeless. Possibly many anchors had been thrown out to pick up, had
all dragged, and last of all came to the Jewish trial. (Of course,
under the Pagan absence of sin, _a fall was impossible_. A return was
impossible, in the sense that you cannot return to a place which you
have never left. Have I ever noticed this?) We are not to suppose that
the angels were really in a state of rebellion. So far from that, it
was evidently amongst the purposes of God that what are called false
Gods, and are so in the ultimate sense of resting on tainted
principles and tending to ruin--perhaps irretrievable (though it would
be the same thing practically if no restoration were possible but
through vast æons of unhappy incarnations)--but otherwise were as
real as anything can be into whose nature a germ of evil has entered,
should effect a secondary ministration of the last importance to man's
welfare. Doubt there can be little that without any religion, any
sense of dependency, or gratitude, or reverence as to superior
natures, man would rapidly have deteriorated; and that would have
tended to such destruction of all nobler principles--patriotism
(strong in the old world as with us), humanity, ties of parentage or
neighbourhood--as would soon have thinned the world; so that the
Jewish process thus going on must have failed for want of
correspondencies to the scheme--possibly endless oscillations which,
however coincident with plagues, would extirpate the human race. We
may see in manufacturing neighbourhoods, so long as no dependency
exists on masters, where wages show that not work, but workmen, are
scarce, how unamiable, insolent, fierce, are the people; the poor
cottagers on a great estate may sometimes offend you by too obsequious
a spirit towards all gentry. That was a transition state in England
during the first half of the eighteenth century, when few
manufacturers and merchants had risen to such a generous model. But
this leaves room for many domestic virtues that would suffer greatly
in the other state. Yet this is but a faint image of the total
independency. Oaths were sacred only through the temporal judgments
supposed to overtake those who insulted the Gods by summoning them to
witness a false contract. But this would have been only part of the
evil. So long as men acknowledged higher natures, they were doubtful
about futurity. This doubt had little strength on the side of hope,
but much on the side of fear. The blessings of any future state were
cheerless and insipid mockeries; so Achilles--how he bemoans his
state! But the torments were real. By far more, however, they,
through this coarse agency of syllogistic dread, would act to show man
the degradation of his nature when all light of a higher existence had
disappeared. That which did not exist for natures supposed capable
originally of immortality, how should it exist for him? And that man
must have observed with little attention what takes place in this
world if he needs to be told that nothing tends to make his own
species cheap and hateful in his eyes so certainly as moral
degradation driven to a point of no hope. So in squalid dungeons, in
captivities of slaves, nay, in absolute pauperism, all hate each other
fiercely. Even with us, how sad is the thought--that, just as a man
needs pity, as he is stript of all things, when most the sympathy of
men should settle on him, then most is he contemplated with a
hard-hearted contempt! The Jews when injured by our own oppressive
princes were despised and hated. Had they raised an empire, licked
their oppressors well, they would have been compassionately loved. So
lunatics heretofore; so galley-slaves--Toulon, Marseilles, etc. This
brutal principle of degradation soon developed in man. The Gods,
therefore, performed a great agency for man. And it is clear that God
did not discourage _common_ rites or rights for His altar or theirs.
Nay, he sent Israel to Egypt--as one reason--to learn ceremonies
amongst a people who sequestered them. In evil the Jews always clove
to their religion. Next the difficulty of people, miracles, though
less for false Gods, and least of all for the meanest, was _alike_ for
both. Astarte does not kill Sayth on the spot, but by a judgment.
Gods, no more their God, spake an instant law. Even the prophets are
properly no prophets, but only the mode of speech by God,--as clear as
He _can_ speak. Men mistake God's hate by their own. So neither could
He reveal Himself. A vast age would be required for seeing God.

But for the thought of man as evil (or of any other form of evil), as
reconcilable with their idea of a perfect God, a happy idea may, like
the categories, proceed upon a necessity for a perfect _inversion_ of
the _methodus conspiciendi_. Let us retrace, but in such a form as to be
apprehensible by all readers. Analytic and synthetic propositions at
once throw light upon the notion of a category. Once it had been a mere
abstraction; of no possible use except as a convenient cell for
referring (as in a nest of boxes), which may perhaps as much degrade the
idea as a relative of my own degraded the image of the crescent moon by
saying, in his abhorrence of sentimentality, that it reminded him of the
segment from his own thumb-nail when clean cut by an instrument called a
nail-cutter. This was the Aristotelian notion. But Kant could not
content himself with this idea. His own theory (1) as to time and space,
(2) the refutation of Hume's notion of cause, and (3) his own great
discovery of synthetic and analytic propositions, all prepared the way
for a totally new view. But, now, what is the origin of this necessity
applied to the category as founded in the synthesis? How does a
synthesis make itself or anything else necessary? Explain me that.

This was written perhaps a fortnight ago. Now, Monday, May 23 (day fixed
for Dan Good's execution), I _do_ explain it by what this moment I seem
to have discovered--the necessity of cause, of substance, etc., lies in
the intervening synthesis. This you _must_ pass through in the course
tending to and finally reaching the idea; for the analytical presupposes
this synthesis.

Not only must the energies of destruction be equal to those of creation,
but, in fact, perhaps by the trespassing a little of the first upon the
last, is the true advance sustained; for it must be an advance as well
as a balance. But you say this will but in other words mean that forces
devoted (and properly so) to production or creation are absorbed by
destruction. True; but the opposing phenomena will be going on in a
large ratio, and each must react on the other. The productive must meet
and correspond to the destructive. The destructive must revise and
stimulate the continued production.

What else is the laying of such a stress on miracles but the case of 'a
wicked and adulterous generation asking a sign'?

But what are these miracles for? To prove a legislation from God. But,
first, this could not be proved, even if miracle-working were the test
of Divine mission, by doing miracles until we knew whether the power
were genuine; _i.e._, not, like the magicians of Pharaoh or the witch of
Endor, from below. Secondly, you are a poor, pitiful creature, that
think the power to do miracles, or power of any kind that can exhibit
itself in an act, the note of a god-like commission. Better is one ray
of truth (not seen previously by man), of _moral_ truth, _e.g._,
forgiveness of enemies, than all the powers which could create the
world.

'Oh yes!' says the objector; 'but Christ was holy as a man.' This we
know first; then we judge by His power that He must have been from God.
But if it were doubtful whether His power were from God, then, until
this doubt is _otherwise_, is independently removed, you cannot decide
if He _was_ holy by a test of holiness absolutely irrelevant. With other
holiness--apparent holiness--a simulation might be combined. You can
never tell that a man is holy; and for the plain reason that God only
can read the heart.

'Let Him come down from the cross, and we,' etc. Yes; they fancied so.
But see what would really have followed. They would have been stunned
and confounded for the moment, but not at all converted in heart. Their
hatred to Christ was not built on their unbelief, but their unbelief in
Christ was built on their hatred; and this hatred would not have been
mitigated by another (however astounding) miracle. This I wrote (Monday
morning, June 7, 1847) in reference to my saying on the general question
of miracles: Why these _dubious_ miracles?--such as curing blindness
that may have been cured by a _process_?--since the _unity_ given to the
act of healing is probably (more probably than otherwise) but the
figurative unity of the tendency to _mythus_; or else it is that unity
misapprehended and mistranslated by the reporters. Such, again, as the
miracles of the loaves--so liable to be utterly gossip, so incapable of
being watched or examined amongst a crowd of 7,000 people. Besides, were
these people mad? The very fact which is said to have drawn Christ's
pity, viz., their situation in the desert, surely could not have escaped
their own attention on going thither. Think of 7,000 people rushing to a
sort of destruction; for if less than that the mere inconvenience was
not worthy of Divine attention. Now, said I, why not give us (if
miracles _are_ required) one that nobody could doubt--removing a
mountain, _e.g._? Yes; but here the other party begin to _see_ the evil
of miracles. Oh, this would have _coerced_ people into believing! Rest
you safe as to that. It would have been no believing in any proper
sense: it would, at the utmost--and supposing no vital demur to popular
miracle--have led people into that belief which Christ Himself describes
(and regrets) as calling Him Lord! Lord! The pretended belief would have
left them just where they were as to any real belief in Christ.
Previously, however, or over and above all this, there would be the
demur (let the miracle have been what it might) of, By what power, by
whose agency or help? For if Christ does a miracle, probably He may do
it by alliance with some _Z_ standing behind, out of sight. Or if by His
own skill, how or whence derived, or of what nature? This obstinately
recurrent question remains.

There is not the meanest court in Christendom or Islam that would not
say, if called on to adjudicate the rights of an estate on such evidence
as the mere facts of the Gospel: 'O good God, how can we do this? Which
of us knows who this Matthew was--whether he ever lived, or, if so,
whether he ever wrote a line of all this? or, if he did, how situated as
to motives, as to means of information, as to judgment and
discrimination? Who knows anything of the contrivances or the various
personal interests in which the whole narrative originated, or when? All
is dark and dusty.' Nothing in such a case _can_ be proved but what
shines by its own light. Nay, God Himself could not attest a miracle,
but (listen to this!)--but by the internal revelation or visiting of the
Spirit--to evade which, to dispense with which, a miracle is ever
resorted to.

Besides the objection to miracles that they are not capable of
attestation, Hume's objection is not that they are false, but that they
are incommunicable. Two different duties arise for the man who witnesses
a miracle and for him who receives traditionally. The duty of the first
is to confide in his own experience, which may, besides, have been
repeated; of the second, to confide in his understanding, which says:
'Less marvel that the reporter should have erred than that nature should
have been violated.'

How dearly do these people betray their own hypocrisy about the divinity
of Christianity, and at the same time the meanness of their own natures,
who think the Messiah, or God's Messenger, must first prove His own
commission by an act of power; whereas (1) a new revelation of moral
forces could not be invented by all generations, and (2) an act of power
much more probably argues an alliance with the devil. I should gloomily
suspect a man who came forward as a magician.

Suppose the Gospels written thirty years after the events, and by
ignorant, superstitious men who have adopted the fables that old women
had surrounded Christ with--how does this supposition vitiate the report
of Christ's parables? But, on the other hand, they could no more have
invented the parables than a man alleging a diamond-mine could invent a
diamond as attestation. The parables prove themselves.

Now, this is exceedingly well worth consideration. I know not at all
whether what I am going to say has been said already--life would not
suffice in every field or section of a field to search every nook and
section of a nook for the possibilities of chance utterance given to any
stray opinion. But this I know without any doubt at all, that it cannot
have been said effectually, cannot have been so said as to publish and
disperse itself; else it is impossible that the crazy logic current upon
these topics should have lived, or that many separate arguments should
ever for very shame have been uttered. Said or not said, let us presume
it unsaid, and let me state the true answer as if _de novo_, even if by
accident somewhere the darkness shelters this same answer as uttered
long ago.

Now, therefore, I will suppose that He _had_ come down from the Cross.
No case can so powerfully illustrate the filthy falsehood and pollution
of that idea which men generally entertain, which the sole creditable
books universally build upon. What would have followed? This would have
followed: that, inverting the order of every true emanation from God,
instead of growing and expanding for ever like a [symbol: <], it would
have attained its _maximum_ at the first. The effect for the half-hour
would have been prodigious, and from that moment when it began to flag
it would degrade rapidly, until, in three days, a far fiercer hatred
against Christ would have been moulded. For observe: into what state of
mind would this marvel have been received? Into any good-will towards
Christ, which previously had been defeated by the belief that He was an
impostor in the sense that He pretended to a power of miracles which in
fact He had not? By no means. The sense in which Christ had been an
impostor for them was in assuming a commission, a spiritual embassy with
appropriate functions, promises, prospects, to which He had no title.
How had that notion--not, viz., of miraculous impostorship, but of
spiritual impostorship--been able to maintain itself? Why, what should
have reasonably destroyed the notion? This, viz., the sublimity of His
moral system. But does the reader imagine that this sublimity is of a
nature to be seen intellectually--that is, insulated and _in vacuo_ for
the intellect? No more than by geometry or by a _sorites_ any man
constitutionally imperfect could come to understand the nature of the
sexual appetite; or a man born deaf could make representable to himself
the living truth of music, a man born blind could make representable the
living truth of colours. All men are not equally deaf in heart--far from
it--the differences are infinite, and some men never could comprehend
the beauty of spiritual truth. But no man could comprehend it without
preparation. That preparation was found in his training of Judaism;
which to those whose hearts were hearts of flesh, not stony and charmed
against hearing, had already anticipated the first outlines of Christian
ideas. Sin, purity, holiness unimaginable, these had already been
inoculated into the Jewish mind. And amongst the race inoculated Christ
found enough for a central nucleus to His future Church. But the natural
tendency under the fever-mist of strife and passion, evoked by the
present position in the world operating upon robust, full-blooded life,
unshaken by grief or tenderness of nature, or constitutional sadness, is
to fail altogether of seeing the features which so powerfully mark
Christianity. Those features, instead of coming out into strong relief,
resemble what we see in mountainous regions where the mist covers the
loftiest peaks.

We have heard of a man saying: 'Give me such titles of honour, so many
myriads of pounds, and then I will consider your proposal that I should
turn Christian.' Now, survey--pause for one moment to survey--the
immeasurable effrontery of this speech. First, it replies to a proposal
having what object--our happiness or his? Why, of course, his: how are
we interested, except on a sublime principle of benevolence, in his
faith being right? Secondly, it is a reply presuming money, the most
fleshly of objects, to modify or any way control religion, _i.e._, a
spiritual concern. This in itself is already monstrous, and pretty much
the same as it would be to order a charge of bayonets against
gravitation, or against an avalanche, or against an earthquake, or
against a deluge. But, suppose it were _not_ so, what incomprehensible
reasoning justifies the notion that not we are to be paid, but that he
is to be paid for a change not concerning or affecting our happiness,
but his?

As to individual nations, it is matter of notoriety that they are often
improgressive. As a whole, it may be true that the human race is under a
necessity of slowly advancing; and it may be a necessity, also, that the
current of the moving waters should finally absorb into its motion that
part of the waters which, left to itself, would stagnate. All this may
be true--and yet it will not follow that the human race must be moving
constantly upon an ascending line, as thus:

nor even upon such a line, with continual pauses or rests interposed, as
thus:

where there is no going back, though a constant interruption to the
going forward; but a third hypothesis is possible: there may be
continual loss of ground, yet so that continually the loss is more than
compensated, and the total result, for any considerable period of
observation, may be that progress is maintained:

At O, by comparison with the previous elevation at A, there is a
repeated falling back; but still upon the whole, and pursuing the
inquiry through a sufficiently large segment of time, the constant
report is--ascent.

Upon this explanation it is perfectly consistent with a general belief
in the going forward of man--that this particular age in which we live
might be stationary, or might even have gone back. It cannot, therefore,
be upon any _à priori_ principle that I maintain the superiority of this
age. It is, and must be upon special examination, applied to the
phenomena of this special age. The last century, in its first thirty
years, offered the spectacle of a death-like collapse in the national
energies. All great interests suffered together. The intellectual power
of the country, spite of the brilliant display in a lower element, made
by one or two men of genius, languished as a whole. The religious
feeling was torpid, and in a degree which insured the strong reaction of
some irritating galvanism, or quickening impulse such as that which was
in fact supplied by Methodism. It is not with that age that I wish to
compare the present. I compare it with the age which terminated thirty
years ago--roused, invigorated, searched as that age was through all its
sensibilities by the electric shock of the French Revolution. It is by
comparison with an age so keenly alive, penetrated by ideas stirring and
uprooting, that I would compare it; and even then the balance of gain in
well-calculated resource, fixed yet stimulating ideals, I hold to be in
our favour--and this in opposition to much argument in an adverse spirit
from many and influential quarters. Indeed, it is a remark which more
than once I have been led to make in print: that if a foreigner were to
inquire for the moral philosophy, the ethics, and even for the
metaphysics, of our English literature, the answer would be, 'Look for
them in the great body of our Divinity.' Not merely the more scholastic
works on theology, but the occasional sermons of our English divines
contain a body of richer philosophical speculation than is elsewhere to
be found; and, to say the truth, far more instructive than anything in
our Lockes, Berkeleys, or other express and professional philosophers.
Having said this by way of showing that I do not overlook their just
pretensions, let me have leave to notice a foible in these writers which
is not merely somewhat ludicrous, but even seriously injurious to
truth. One and all, through a long series of two hundred and fifty
years, think themselves called upon to tax their countrymen--each
severally in his own age--with a separate, peculiar, and unexampled
guilt of infidelity and irreligion. Each worthy man, in his turn, sees
in his own age overt signs of these offences not to be matched in any
other. Five-and-twenty periods of ten years each may be taken,
concerning each of which some excellent writer may be cited to prove
that it had reached a maximum of atrocity, such as should not easily
have been susceptible of aggravation, but which invariably the _relays_
through all the subsequent periods affirm their own contemporaries to
have attained. Every decennium is regularly worse than that which
precedes it, until the mind is perfectly confounded by the _Pelion upon
Ossa_ which must overwhelm the last term of the twenty-five. It is the
mere necessity of a logical _sorites_, that such a horrible race of
villains as the men of the twenty-fifth decennium ought not to be
suffered to breathe. Now, the whole error arises out of an imbecile
self-surrender to the first impressions from the process of abstraction
as applied to remote objects. Survey a town under the benefit of a ten
miles' distance, combined with a dreamy sunshine, and it will appear a
city of celestial palaces. Enter it, and you will find the same filth,
the same ruins, the same disproportions as anywhere else. So of past
ages, seen through the haze of an abstraction which removes all
circumstantial features of deformity. Call up any one of those ages, if
it were possible, into the realities of life, and these worthy praisers
of the past would be surprised to find every feature repeated which they
had fancied peculiar to their own times. Meanwhile this erroneous
doctrine of sermons has a double ill consequence: first, the whole
chain of twenty-five writers, when brought together, consecutively
reflect a colouring of absurdity upon each other; separately they might
be endurable, but all at once, predicating (each of his own period
exclusively) what runs with a rolling fire through twenty-five such
periods in succession, cannot but recall to the reader that senseless
doctrine of a physical decay in man, as if man were once stronger,
broader, taller, etc.--upon which hypothesis of a gradual descent why
should it have stopped at any special point? How could the human race
have failed long ago to reach the point of _zero_? But, secondly, such a
doctrine is most injurious and insulting to Christianity. If, after
eighteen hundred years of development, it could be seriously true of
Christianity that it had left any age or generation of men worse in
conduct, or in feeling, or in belief, than all their predecessors, what
reasonable expectation could we have that in eighteen hundred years more
the case would be better? Such thoughtless opinions make Christianity to
be a failure.

The Pagan God could have perfect peace with his votary, and yet could
have no tendency to draw that votary to himself. Not so with the God of
Christianity, who cannot give His peace without drawing like a vortex to
Himself, who cannot draw into His own vortex without finding His peace
fulfilled.

'An age when lustre too intense.'--I am much mistaken if Mr. Wordsworth
is not deeply wrong here. Wrong he is beyond a doubt as to the _fact_;
for there could have been no virtual intensity of lustre (unless merely
as a tinsel toy) when it was contradicted by everything in the
_manners_, _habits_, and situations of the Pagan Gods--they who were
content to play in the coarsest manner the part of gay young bloods,
_sowing_ their wild oats, and with a recklessness of consequences to
their female partners never by possibility rivalled by men. I believe
and affirm that lustre the most dazzling and blinding would not have any
_ennobling_ effect except as received into a matrix of previous
unearthly and holy type.


As to Bacchus being eternally young, the ancients had no idea or power
to frame the idea of eternity. Their eternity was a limitary thing. And
this I say not empirically, but _à priori_, on the ground that without
the idea of holiness and unfleshliness, eternity cannot rise buoyant
from the ground, cannot sustain itself. But waive this, and what becomes
of the other things? If he were characteristically distinguished as
young, then, by a mere rebound of the logic, the others were not so
honoured, else where is the special privilege of Bacchus?


'And she shall sing there as in the days of her youth' (Hosea ii.
15).--The case of pathos, a person coming back to places, recalling the
days of youth after a long woe, is quite unknown to the ancients--nay,
the maternal affection itself, though used inevitably, is never
consciously reviewed as an object of beauty.


Duties arise everywhere, but--do not mistake--not under their sublime
form _as_ duties. I claim the honour to have first exposed a fallacy too
common: duties never did, never will, arise save under Christianity,
since without it the sense of a morality lightened by religious motive,
aspiring to holiness, not only of act, but of motive, had not before it
even arisen. It is the pressure of society, its mere needs and palpable
claims, which first calls forth duties, but not _as_ duties; rather as
the casting of parts in a scenical arrangement. A duty, under the low
conception to which at first it conforms, is a _rôle_, no more; it is
strictly what we mean when we talk of a _part_. The sense of conscience
strictly is not touched under any preceding system of religion. It is
the daughter of Christianity. How little did Wordsworth seize the fact
in his Ode: 'Stern Daughter of the Voice of God' is not enough; the
voice of God is the conscience; and neither has been developed except by
Christianity.


The conscience of a pagan was a conscience pointing to detection: it
pointed only to the needs of society, and caused fear, shame, anxiety,
only on the principles of sympathy; that is, from the impossibility of
releasing himself from a dependence on the reciprocal feelings--the
rebound, the dependence on the _re_sentments of others.


_Morals._--Even ordinary morals could have little practical weight with
the ancients: witness the Roman juries and Roman trials. Had there been
any sense of justice predominant, could Cicero have hoped to prevail by
such defences as that of Milo and fifty-six others, where the argument
is merely fanciful--such a _Hein-gespinst_ as might be applauded with
'very good!' 'bravo!' in any mock trial like that silly one devised by
Dean Swift.


The slowness and obtuseness of the Romans to pathos appears _à priori_
in their amphitheatre, and its tendency to put out the theatre;
secondly, _à posteriori_, in the fact that their theatre was put out;
and also, _à posteriori_, in the coarseness of their sensibilities to
real distresses unless costumed and made sensible as well as
intelligible. The grossness of this demand, which proceeded even so far
as pinching to elicit a cry, is beyond easy credit to men of their time.


The narrow range of the Greek intellect, always revolving through seven
or eight centuries about a few memorable examples--from the Life of
Themistocles to Zeno or Demosthenes.


The Grecian glories of every kind seem sociable and affable, courting
sympathy. The Jewish seem malignantly [Greek: autarkeis].


But just as Paganism respected only rights of action, possession, etc.,
Christianity respects a far higher scale of claims, viz., as to the
wounds to feelings, to deep injury, though not grounded in anything
measurable or expoundable by external results. Man! you have said that
which you were too proud and obstinate to unsay, which has lacerated
some heart for thirty years that had perhaps secretly and faithfully
served you and yours. Christianity lays hold on that as a point of
conscience, if not of honour, to make _amends_, if in no other way, by
remorse.


As to the tears of Oedipus in the crises. I am compelled to believe that
Sophocles erred as regarded nature; for in cases so transcendent as this
Greek nature and English nature could not differ. In the great agony on
Mount Oeta, Hercules points the pity of his son Hyllus to the extremity
of torment besieging him on the humiliating evidence of the tears which
they extorted from him. 'Pity me,' says he, 'that weep with sobs like a
girl: a thing that no one could have charged upon the man' (pointing to
himself); 'but ever without a groan I followed out to the end my
calamities.' Now, on the contrary, on the words of the oracle, that
beckoned away with impatient sounds Oedipus from his dear sublime
Antigone, Oedipus is made to weep.

But this is impossible. Always the tears arose, and will arise, on the
_relaxation_ of the torment and in the rear of silent anguish on its
sudden suspense, amidst a continued headlong movement; and also, in
looking back, tears, unless checked, might easily arise. But never
during the torment: on the rack there are no tears shed, and those who
suffered on the scaffold never yet shed tears, unless it may have been
at some oblique glance at things collateral to their suffering, as
suppose a sudden glimpse of a child's face which they had loved in life.


Is not every [Greek: aiôn] of civilization an inheritance from a
previous state not so high? Thus, _e.g._, the Romans, with so little of
Christian restraint, would have perished by reaction of their own vices,
but for certain prejudices and follies about trade, manufacture, etc.,
and but for oil on their persons to prevent contagion. Now, this oil had
been, I think, a secret bequeathed from some older and higher
civilization long since passed away. We have it not, but neither have we
so much needed it. Soon, however, we shall restore the secret by science
more perfect.


Was Christianity meant to narrow or to widen the road to future
happiness? If I were translated to some other planet, I should say:

1. _No_; for it raised a far higher standard--_ergo_, made the
realization of this far more difficult.

2. _Yes_; for it introduced a new machinery for realizing this standard:
(first) Christ's atonement, (second) grace.


But, according to some bigots (as Jeremy Taylor and Sir Thomas Browne),
as cited by Coleridge, Christianity first opened any road at all. Yet,
surely they forget that, if simply to come too early was the fatal bar
to their claims in the case, Abraham, the father of the faithful, could
not benefit.


Yesterday, Thursday, October 21 (1843), I think, or the day before, I
first perceived that the first great proof of Christianity is the proof
of Judaism, and the proof of that lies in the Jehovah. What merely
natural man capable of devising a God for himself such as the Jewish?


Of all eradications of this doctrine (of human progress), the most
difficult is that connected with the outward shows--in air, in
colouring, in form, in grouping of the great elements composing the
furniture of the heavens and the earth. It is most difficult, even when
confining one's attention to the modern case, and neglecting the
comparison with the ancient, at all to assign the analysis of those
steps by which to us Christians (but never before) the sea and the sky
and the clouds and the many inter-modifications of these, A, B, C, D,
and again the many interactions of the whole, the sun (S.), the moon
(M.), the noon (N. S.)--the breathless, silent noon--the gay
afternoon--the solemn glory of sunset--the dove-like glimpse of Paradise
in the tender light of early dawn--by which these obtain a power utterly
unknown, undreamed of, unintelligible to a Pagan. If we had spoken to
Plato--to Cicero--of the deep pathos in a sunset, would he--would
either--have gone along with us? The foolish reader thinks, Why, perhaps
not, not altogether as to the quantity--the degree of emotion.
Doubtless, it is undeniable that we moderns have far more sensibility to
the phenomena and visual glories of this world which we inhabit. And it
_is_ possible that, reflecting on the singularity of this characteristic
badge worn by modern civilization, he may go so far as to suspect that
Christianity has had something to do with it. But, on seeking to
complete the chain which connects them, he finds himself quite unable to
recover the principal link.

Now, it will prove, after all, even for myself who have exposed and
revealed these new ligatures by which Christianity connects man with
awful interests in the world, a most insurmountable task to assign the
total nidus in which this new power resides, or the total phenomenology
through which that passes to and fro. Generally it seems to stand thus:
God reveals Himself to us more or less dimly in vast numbers of
processes; for example, in those of vegetation, animal growth,
crystallization, etc. These impress us not primarily, but secondarily on
reflection, after considering the enormity of changes worked annually,
and working even at the moment we speak. Then, again, other arrangements
throw us more powerfully upon the moral qualities of God; _e.g._, we see
the fence, the shell, the covering, varied in ten million ways, by which
in buds and blossoms He insures the ultimate protection of the fruit.
What protection, analogous to this, has He established for animals; or,
taking up the question in the ideal case, for man, the supreme of His
creatures? We perceive that He has relied upon love, upon love
strengthened to the adamantine force of insanity or delirium, by the
mere aspect of utter, utter helplessness in the human infant. It is not
by power, by means visibly developed, that this result is secured, but
by means spiritual and 'transcendental' in the highest degree.


The baseness and incorrigible ignobility of the Oriental mind is seen in
the radical inability to appreciate justice when brought into collision
with the royal privileges of rulers that represent the nation. Not only,
for example, do Turks, etc., think it an essential function of royalty
to cut off heads, but they think it essential to the consummation of
this function that the sacrifice should rest upon caprice known and
avowed. To suppose it wicked as a mere process of executing the laws
would rob it of all its grandeur. It would stand for nothing. Nay, even
if the power were conceded, and the sovereign should abstain from using
it of his own free will and choice, this would not satisfy the wretched
Turk. Blood, lawless blood--a horrid Moloch, surmounting a grim company
of torturers and executioners, and on the other side revelling in a
thousand unconsenting women--this hideous image of brutal power and
unvarnished lust is clearly indispensable to the Turk as incarnating the
representative grandeur of his nation. With this ideal ever present to
the Asiatic and Mohammedan mind, no wonder that even their religion
needs the aid of the sword and bloodshed to secure conversion.


In the _Spectator_ is mentioned, as an Eastern apologue, that a vizier
who (like Chaucer's Canace) had learned the language of birds used it
with political effect to his sovereign. The sultan had demanded to know
what a certain reverend owl was speechifying about to another owl
distantly related to him. The vizier listened, and reported that the
liberal old owl was making a settlement upon his daughter, in case his
friend's son should marry her, of a dozen ruined villages. Loyally long
life to our noble sultan! I shall, my dear friend, always have a ruined
village at your service against a rainy day, so long as our present
ruler reigns and desolates.

_Morality._--That Paley's principle does not apply to the higher
morality of Christianity is evident from this: when I seek to bring
before myself some ordinary form of wickedness that all men offend by, I
think, perhaps, of their ingratitude. The man born to £400 a year thinks
nothing of it, compares himself only with those above his own standard,
and sees rather a ground of discontent in his £400 as not being £4,000
than any ground of deep thankfulness. Now, this being so odious a form
of immorality, should--by Paley--terminate in excessive evil. On the
contrary, it is the principle, the very dissatisfaction which God uses
for keep_ing_ the world mov_ing_ (how villainous the form--these
'ings'!).


All faith in the great majority is, and ought to be, implicit. That is,
your faith is not unrolled--not separately applied to each individual
doctrine--but is applied to some individual man, and on him you rely.
What he says, you say; what he believes, you believe. Now, he believes
all these doctrines, and you implicitly through him. But what I chiefly
say as the object of this note is, that the bulk of men must believe by
an implicit faith. _Ergo_, decry it not.


You delude yourself, Christian theorist, with the idea of offences that
else would unfit you for heaven being washed out by repentance. But
hearken a moment. Figure the case of those innumerable people that,
having no temptation, small or great, to commit murder, _would_ have
committed it cheerfully for half-a-crown; that, having no opening or
possibility for committing adultery, _would_ have committed it in case
they had. Now, of these people, having no possibility of repentance (for
how repent of what they have not done?), and yet ripe to excess for the
guilt, what will you say? Shall they perish because they _might_ have
been guilty? Shall they not perish because the potential guilt was not,
by pure accident, accomplished _in esse_?


Here is a mistake to be guarded against. If you ask why such a man,
though by nature gross or even Swift-like in his love of dirty ideas,
yet, because a gentleman and moving in corresponding society, does not
indulge in such brutalities, the answer is that he abstains through the
modifications of the sympathies. A low man in low society would not be
doubtful of its reception; but he, by the anticipations of sympathy (a
form that should be introduced as technically as Kant's anticipations of
perception), feels it would be ill or gloomily received. Well now, I,
when saying that a man is altered by sympathy so as to think _that_,
through means of this power, which otherwise he would not think, shall
be interpreted of such a case as that above. But wait; there is a
distinction: the man does not think differently, he only acts as if he
thought differently. The case I contemplate is far otherwise; it is
where a man feels a lively contempt or admiration in consequence of
seeing or hearing such feelings powerfully expressed by a multitude, or,
at least, by others which else he would not have felt. Vulgar people
would sit for hours in the presence of people the most refined, totally
unaware of their superiority, for the same reason that most people (if
assenting to the praise of the Lord's Prayer) would do so
hyper-critically, because its real and chief beauties are negative.


Not only is it false that my understanding is no measure or rule for
another man, but of necessity it is so, and every step I take towards
truth for myself is a step made on behalf of every other man.


We doubt if the world in the sense of a synthesis of action--the
procession and carrying out of ends and purposes--_could_ consist with
the [Greek: anti]-world (in a religious sense). Men who divide all into
pious people and next to devils see in such a state of evil the natural
tendency (as in all other _monstrous_ evils--which this must be if an
evil at all) to correction and redress. But now assume a man, sober,
honourable, cheerful, healthy, active, occupied all day long in toilsome
duties (or what he believes duties) for ends not selfish; this man has
never had a thought of death, hell, etc., and looking abroad on those
who dwell in such contemplations, he regards them sincerely, not
unkindly or with contempt; partially he respects them, but he looks on
them as under a monstrous delusion, in a fever, in a panic, as in a case
of broken equilibrium. Now he is right. And, moreover, secondly, two
other feelings or suspicions come on, (1) of hypocrisy, (2) of the
violation of inner shame in publishing the most awful private feelings.


_The Tendency of a Good Fortune inherited._--I know not that any man has
reason to wish a _sufficient_ patrimonial estate for his son. Much to
have something so as to start with an advantage. But the natural
consequence of having a full fortune is to become idle and vapid. For,
on asking what a young man has that he can employ himself upon, the
answer would be, 'Oh! why, those pursuits which presuppose solitude.' At
once you feel this to be hollow nonsense. Not one man in ten thousand
has powers to turn solitude into a blessing. They care not, _e.g._, for
geometry; and the cause is chiefly that they have been ill taught in
geometry; and the effect is that geometry must and will languish, if
treated as a mere amateur pursuit. So of any other. Secondly, yet of
Englishmen I must say that beyond all nations a man so situated does
not, in fact, become idle. He it is, and his class, that discharge the
public business of each county or district. Thirdly: And in the view,
were there no other, one sees at once the use of fox-hunting, let it be
as boisterous as you please. Is it not better to be boisterous than
gossip-ridden, eaves-dropping, seeking aliment for the spirits in the
petty scandal of the neighbourhood?


'He' (_The Times_) 'declares that the poorest artisan has a greater
stake than they' ('the Landed Interest') 'in the prosperity of the
country, and is, consequently, more likely to give sound advice. His
exposition of the intimate connection existing between the welfare of
the poor workman and the welfare of the country is both just and
admirable. But he manifestly underrates the corresponding relations of
the landowners, and wholly omits to show, even if the artisan's state
were the greatest, how his opinions are likely to be most valuable. To
suppose that a man is necessarily the best judge in whatever concerns
him most is a sad _non-sequitur_; for if self-interest ensured wisdom,
no one would ever go wrong in anything. Every man would be his own
minister, and every invalid would be his own best physician. The wounded
limbs of the community are the best judges of the pain they suffer; but
it is the wise heads of the community that best can apply a remedy that
best can cure the wound without causing it to break out in another
quarter. Poverty is blind; but the upper classes "education has
enlightened, and habit made foreseeing."'


We live in times great from the events and little from the character of
the actors. Every month summons us to the spectacle of some new perfidy
in the leaders of parties and the most conspicuous public servants; and
the profligacy which we charge upon the statesmen of the seventeenth
century has revolved in full measure upon our own days.


_Justifications of Novels._--The two following justifications of novels
occur to me. Firstly, that if some dreadful crisis awaited a ship of
passengers at the line--where equally the danger was mysterious and
multiform, the safety mysterious and multiform--how monstrous if a man
should say to a lady, 'What are you reading?' 'Oh, I'm reading about our
dreadful crisis, now so near'; and he should answer, 'Oh, nonsense! read
something to improve your mind; read about Alexander the Great, about
Spurius Ahala, about Caius Gracchus, or, if you please, Tiberius.' But
just such nonsense it is, when people ridicule reading romances in which
the great event of the fiction is the real great event of a female
life.

There are others, you say--she loses a child. Yes, that's a great event.
But that arises out of this vast equinoctial event.

Secondly, as all things are predisposed to the natures which must be
surrounded by them, so we may see that the element of social evolution
of character, manners, caprices, etc., has been adapted to the vast mass
of human minds. It is a mean element, you say. The revelations of Albert
Smith, Dickens, etc., are essentially mean, vulgar, plebeian, not only
in an aristocratic sense, but also in a philosophical sense. True, but
the minds that are to live and move in it are also mean, essentially
mean. Nothing grand in them? Yes, doubtless in the veriest grub as to
capacity, but the capacity is undeveloped.

_Ergo_, as to the intrigue or fable, and as to the conduct or evolution
of this fable--novels must be the chief natural resource of woman.


_Moral Certainty._--As that a child of two years (or under) is not party
to a plot. Now, this would allow a shade of doubt--a child so old might
cry out or give notice.


This monstrous representation that the great war with France (1803-15)
had for its object to prevent Napoleon from sitting on the throne of
France--which recently, in contempt of all truth and common-sense, I
have so repeatedly seen advanced--throws a man profoundly on the
question of what _was_ the object of that war. Surely, in so far as we
are concerned, the matter was settled at Amiens in the very first year
of the century. December, 1799, Napoleon had been suffered by the
unsteady public opinion of France--abhorring a master, and yet sensible
that for the chief conscious necessity of France, viz., a developer of
her latent martial powers, she must look for a master or else have her
powers squandered--to mount the consular throne. He lived, he _could_
live, only by victorious war. Most perilous was the prospect for
England. In the path which not Napoleon, but France, was now preparing
to tread, and which was the path of Napoleon no otherwise than that he
was the tool of France, was that servitor who must gratify her grand
infirmity or else be rapidly extinguished himself, unhappily for
herself, England was the main counter-champion. The course of honour
left to England was too fatally the course of resistance. Resistance to
what? To Napoleon personally? Not at all; but to Napoleon as pledged by
his destiny to the prosecution of a French conquering policy. That
personally England had no hostility to Napoleon is settled by the fact
that she had at Amiens cheerfully conceded the superior power. Under
what title? would have been the most childish of demurs. That by act she
never conceded the title of emperor was the mere natural diplomatic
result of never having once been at peace with Napoleon under that
title. Else it was a point of entire indifference. Granting the
consulship, she had granted all that could be asked. And what she
opposed was the determined war course of Napoleon and the schemes of
ultra-Polish partition to which Napoleon had privately tempted her under
circumstances of no such sense as existed and still exist for Russia.
This policy, as soon as exposed, and not before bitter insults to
herself, England resisted. And therefore it is that at this day we live.
But as to Napoleon, as apart from the policy of Napoleon, no
childishness can be wilder.


At some unlucky moment when the Crown commanded unusual resources, the
De Quinceys met with the fate ascribed, perhaps fabulously, to some
small heavenly bodies (asteroids or what, I do not precisely know): on
some dark day, by mistake perhaps, they exploded, and scattered their
ruins all over the central provinces of England, where chiefly had lain
their territorial influence. Especially in the counties of Leicester,
Lincoln and Rutland were found fragments of the vast landed estates held
by these potentates when Earls of Winchester.


The hatred of truth at first dawning--that instinct which makes you
revolt from the pure beams which search the foul depths and abysses of
error--is well illustrated by the action of the atmospheric currents,
when blowing through an open window upon smoke. What do you see?
Sometimes the impression is strong upon your _ocular_ belief that the
window is driving the smoke in. You can hardly be convinced of the
contrary--scarcely when five or seven minutes has absolutely rarefied the
smoke so much that a book-lettering previously invisible has become even
legible. And at last, when the fact, the result, the experience, has
corrected the contradictory theory of the eye, you begin to suspect,
without any aid from science, that there were two currents, one of which
comes round in a curve [Illustration: )] and effects the exit for the
other which the window had driven in; just as in the Straits of Gibraltar
there is manifestly an upper current setting one way, which you therefore
conjecture to argue a lower current setting the other, and thus
redressing the equilibrium. Here the smoke corresponds to bits of chip or
any loose suspended body in the Gibraltar current. What answers to the
current of water is the air, and if the equilibrium _is_ kept up, the
re-entrant current balances your retiring current, and the latter carries
out the smoke entangled in itself. By the objection, say, of a child,
there ought to be a re-entrant column of smoke, which there is not. For
the air drives the smoke of the fire up the chimney, and of its own
contribution the air has no smoke to give.

Or the Augean stable may image it. Doubtless when the first disturbance
took place in the abominable mess, those acting would be apt to question
for a moment whether it had not been more advisable to leave it alone.


Moralists say, 'Nobody will attack you, or hate you, or blame you for
your virtues.' What falsehood! Not _as_ virtues, it may be in their
eyes, but virtues, nevertheless. Connect with Kant the error of
supposing _ætas parentum_, etc., to be the doctrine of sin.


Not for what you have done, but for what you are--not because in life
you did forsake a wife and children--did endure to eat and drink and lie
softly yourself whilst those who should have been as your heart-drops
were starving: not because you did that so much is forgiven you, but
because you were capable of that, therefore you are incapable of heaven.


_Immodesty._--The greatest mistake occurs to me now (Wednesday, April
17th, '44). A girl who should have been unhappily conscious of
voluptuous hours, her you would call modest in case of her passing with
downcast looks. But why, then, is she not so? That girl is immodest who
reconciles to herself such things, and yet assumes the look of
innocence.


_About Women._--A man brings his own idle preconceptions, and fancies
that he has learned them from his experience.


Far more to be feared than any depth of serious love, however absorbing
and apparently foolish, is that vicious condition in which trifling
takes the place of all serious love, when women are viewed only as
dolls, and addressed with an odious leer of affected knowingness as 'my
dear,' wink, etc. Now to this tends the false condition of women when
called 'the ladies.' On the other hand, what an awful elevation arises
when each views in the other a creature capable of the same noble
duties--she no less than he a creature of lofty aspirations; she by the
same right a daughter of God as he a son of God; she bearing her eyes
erect to the heavens no less than he!


_Low Degree._--We see often that this takes place very strongly and
decidedly with regard to men, notoriously pleasant men and remarkably
good-natured, which shows at once in what road the thing travels. And if
such a nature should be combined with what Butler thinks virtue, it
might be doubtful to which of the two the tribute of kind attentions
were paid; but now seeing the true case, we know how to interpret this
hypothetical case of Butler's accordingly.


'Visit the sins of the fathers,' etc. This people pretend to think
monstrous. Yet what else in effect happens and must happen to Jews
inheriting by filial obedience and natural sympathy all that
anti-Christian hostility which prevailed in the age succeeding to that
of Christ? What evil--of suffering, of penalties now or in reserve may
be attached to this spirit of hostility--follows the children through
all generations!


Case of Timoleon, whose killing of his brother might afterwards be read
into X Y Z or into X a b according to his conduct (either into murder or
patriotism), is a good illustration of synthesis.


To illustrate Cicero's argument in 'Pro Cælio' as to the frequency of
men wild and dissipated in youth becoming eminent citizens, one might
adduce this case from the word _Themistocles_ in the Index to the Græci
Rhetorici. But I see or I fancy cause to notice this passage for the
following cause: it contains only nine words, four in the first comma,
five in the last, and of these nine four are taken up in noting the time
[Greek: to prôton to telen]; ergo, five words record the remarkable
revolution from one state to another, and the character of each state.

Two cases of young men's dissipation--1. Horace's record of his father's
advice: 'Concessa,' etc.; 2. Cicero's 'Pro Cælio.'


_What Crotchets in every Direction!_--1. The Germans, or, let me speak
more correctly, some of the Germans (and doubtless full of Hoch beer or
strong drink), found out some thirty years ago that there were only
three men of genius in the records of our planet. And who were they? (1)
Homer; (2) Shakespeare; (3) Goethe. So that absolutely Milton was shut
out from the constellation. Even he wanted a ticket, though Master
Sorrows-of-Werther had one. The porter, it seems, fancied he had no
marriage garment, a mistake which a mob might correct, saying, 'No
marriage garment! then, damme, he shall have this fellow's' (viz.,
Goethe's). The trinity, according to these vagabonds, was complete
without Milton, as the Roman pomp was full to the eye of the sycophant
without the bust of Brutus.

2. Macaulay fancied there were only two men of genius in the reign of
Charles II., viz., Milton and the tinker Bunyan.

3. Coleridge (p. 237, 'Table-Talk') fancied there were only two men of
genius in his own generation: W. W. and Sir Humphrey Davy.


Jeremy Taylor having mentioned two religious men, St. Paul the Hermit
and Sulpitius, as having atoned for some supposed foolish garrulities,
the one by a three years' silence, the other by a lifelong silence, goes
on to express his dissatisfaction with a mode of _rabiosa silentia_ so
memorable as this.

Yet it is certain in silence there is wisdom, and there may be deep
religion. And indeed it is certain, great knowledge, if it be without
vanity, is the most severe bridle of the tongue. For so I have heard
that all the noises and prating of the pool, the croaking of frogs and
toads, is hushed and appeased upon the instant of bringing upon them the
light of a candle or torch. Every beam of reason and ray of knowledge
checks the dissoluteness of the tongue. 'Ut quisque contemplissimus est,
ita solutissimæ linguæ est,' said Seneca.

The silence must be [Greek: kairios], not sullen and ill-natured; 'nam
sic etiam tacuisse nocet'?--of all things in the world a prating
religion and much talk in holy things does most profane the
mysteriousness of it, and dismantles its regard, and makes cheap its
reverence and takes off fear and awfulness, and makes it loose and
garish, and like the laughters of drunkenness.


_Public Morality._--It ought not to be left to a man's interest merely
to protect the animals in his power. Dogs are no longer worked in the
way they were, although the change must have arbitrarily robbed many
poor men of half bread. But in a case as valuable as that of the horse,
it has been known that a man has incurred the total ruin of a series of
horses against even his own gain or self-interest. There ought to be a
_custos veteranorum_, a keeper and protector of the poor brutes who are
brought within the pale of social use and service. The difficulty, you
say! Legislation has met and dealt effectively with far more complicated
and minute matters than that. For, after all, consider how few of the
brute creation on any wide and permanent scale are brought into the
scheme of human life. Some birds as food, some fishes as ditto; beeves
as food and _sometimes_ as appliers of strength; horses in both
characters. These with elephants and camels, mules, asses, goats, dogs,
and sheep, cats and rabbits, gold-fishes and singing-birds, really
compose the whole of our animal equipage harnessed to the car of human
life.

There are a number of words which, unlocked from their absurd
imprisonment, would become extensively useful. We should say, for
instance, 'condign honours,' 'condign treatment' (treatment appropriate
to the merits), thus at once realizing two rational purposes, viz.,
giving a useful function to a word, which at present has none, and also
providing an intelligible expression for an idea which otherwise is left
without means of uttering itself except through a ponderous
circumlocution. Precisely in the same circumstances of idle and absurd
sequestration stands the term _polemic_. At present, according to the
popular usage, this word has some fantastic inalienable connection with
controversial theology. There cannot be a more childish chimera. No
doubt there is a polemic side or aspect of theology; but so there is of
_all_ knowledge; so there is of _every_ science. The radical and
characteristic idea concerned in this term _polemic_ is found in our own
Parliamentary distinction of _the good speaker_, as contrasted with _the
good debater_. The good speaker is he who unfolds the whole of a
question in its affirmative aspects, who presents these aspects in their
just proportions, and according to their orderly and symmetrical
deductions from each other. But the good debater is he who faces the
negative aspects of the question, who meets sudden objections, has an
answer for any momentary summons of doubt or difficulty, dissipates
seeming inconsistencies, and reconciles the geometrical smoothness of _à
priori_ abstractions with the coarse angularities of practical
experience. The great work of Ricardo is of necessity, and almost in
every page, polemic; whilst very often the particular objections or
difficulties, to which it replies, are not indicated at all, being
spread through entire systems, and assumed as _precognita_ that are
familiar to the learned student.


Writing to scholastic persons, I should be ashamed to explain, but
hoping that I write to many also of the non-scholastic, and even of the
unlearned, I rejoice to explain the proper sense of the word _implicit_.
As the word _condign_, so capable of an extended sense, is yet
constantly restricted to one miserable association, viz., that with the
word _punishment_ (for we never say, as we might say, 'condign
rewards'), so also the word _implicit_ is in English always associated
with the word _faith_. People say that Papists have an _implicit_ faith
in their priests. What they mean is this: If a piece of arras, or a
carpet, is folded up, then it is _implicit_ according to the original
Latin word; if it is unfolded and displayed, then it is _explicit_.
Therefore, when a poor illiterate man (suppose a bog-trotter of Mayo or
Galway) says to his priest (as in effect always he _does_ say), 'Sir, I
cannot comprehend all this doctrine; bless you, I have not the
thousandth part of the learning for it, so it is impossible that I
should directly believe it. But your reverence believes it, the thing is
_wrapt up_ (implicit) in you, and I believe it on that account.' Here
the priest believes explicitly: _he_ believes implicitly.


_Modern._--Is it not shameful that to this hour even literary men of
credit and repute cannot for the life of them interpret this line from
'As You Like It'--

    'Full of wise saws and modern instances'?

A man as well read as Mr. Theodore Hook, and many a hundred beside, have
seriously understood it to mean 'Full of old proverbs, the traditionary
wisdom of nations, and of illustrative examples drawn from modern
experience.' Nonsense! The meaning is, 'Full of old maxims and proverbs,
and of trivial attempts at argument.' That is, tediously redundant in
rules derived from the treasury of popular proverbs,' and in feeble
attempts at connecting these general rules with the special case before
him. The superannuated old magistrate sets out with a proverb, as for
instance this, that _the mother of mischief is no bigger than a midge's
wing_. That proverb forms his major proposition. In his minor
proposition he goes on to argue that the trespass charged upon the
particular prisoner before him was very little bigger than a midge's
wing. And then in his conclusion triumphantly he infers, Ergo, the
prisoner at the bar is the mother of mischief. But says the constable,
'Please, your worship, the prisoner is a man, a hulking clodhopper, some
six or seven feet high, with a strong black beard.' 'Well, that makes no
odds,' rejoins his worship; 'then he's the father of mischief. Clerk,
make out his mittimus.'

The word 'instance' (from the scholastic _instantia_) never meant
_example_ in Shakespeare's age. The word 'modern' never once in
Shakespeare means what it means to _us_ in these days. Even the monkish
Latin word 'modernus' fluctuated in meaning, and did not always imply
_recens_, _neotericus_; but in Shakespeare never. What _does_ it mean in
Shakespeare? Once and for ever it means _trivial_, _inconsiderable_. Dr.
Johnson had too much feeling not to perceive that the word 'modern' had
this value in Shakespeare's acceptation; practically, he felt that it
_availed_ for that sense, but theoretically he could not make out the
_why_. It means that, said the Doctor; but feebly and querulously, like
one sick of the pip, he added, 'Yet I don't know why.' Don't you? Now,
we _do_. The fact is, Dr. Johnson was in a fit of the dismals at that
time; he had recently committed a debauch of tea, having exceeded his
usual allowance by seventy-five cups, so that naturally he had a
'curmurring' in the stomach. Else he could not have failed to see what
we are now going to explain with a wet finger. Everybody is aware that
to be _material_ is the very opposite of being trivial. What is
'material' in a chain of evidence, or in an argument, can never be
trifling. Now, therefore, if you can find a word that will flatly
contradict this word _material_, then you have a capital term for
expressing what is trivial. Well, you find in the word _immaterial_ all
that you are seeking. 'It is quite immaterial' will suit Mr. Touts's
purpose just as well as 'It is really of no consequence, of no
consequence in the world.' To say in a law court that the objection is
immaterial is otherwise to say that it is trivial. Here, then, is the
first step: to contradict the idea of _material_ is effectually to
express the idea of _trivial_. Let us now see if we can find any other
contradiction to the idea of _material_, for one antithesis to that idea
will express as well as any other antithesis the counterpole of the
trivial. Now, clearly the substance of a thing, the material out of
which it is made, is oftentimes of great importance by comparison with
its shape, fashion, or mode. It is of value in your eyes to know whether
your family plate is in substance of gold or of silver; but whether such
a vessel is round or square, ornamented with a wreath of acanthus or
ivy, supported by tigers or by fawns, may be a trivial consideration, or
even worse; for the fashion of your plate, after it has once become
obsolete, may count against you for so much loss as something that will
cost a good deal of money to alter. Here, then, is another contradiction
to the material, and therefore another expression for the trivial:
matter, as against vacancy or the privation of matter, yields the
antithesis of material or immaterial, substantial and unsubstantial;
matter, as against form, yields the antithesis of substance and shape,
or otherwise of material and modal--what is matter and what is the mere
modification of matter, its variation by means of ornament or shape.

The word 'modern' is therefore in Shakespeare uniformly to be pronounced
with the long _o_, as in the words m_o_dal, m_o_dish, and never with the
short _o_ of m[)o]derate, m[)o]dest, or our present word m[)o]dern. And
the law under which Shakespeare uses the word is this: whatsoever is so
trivial as to fall into the relation of a mere shape or fleeting mode to
a permanent substance, _that_ with Shakespeare is modish, or (according
to his form) modern.[29] Thus, a weak, trivial argument (or _instantia_,
the scholastic term for an argument not latent merely, or merely having
the office of sustaining a truth, but urged as an objection, having the
polemic office of contradicting an opponent) is in Shakespeare's idiom,
when viewed as against a substantial argument, a _modern_ argument.

Again, when Cleopatra, defending herself against the perfidy of her
steward, wishes to impress upon Octavius that any articles which she may
have kept back from the inventory of her personal chattels are but
trifles, she expresses this by saying that they are but

    'Such as we greet modern friends withal;'

_i.e._, such as we bestow, at welcoming or at parting, upon the
slightest acquaintances. The whole stress of the logic lies upon the
epithet _modern_--for simply as friends, had they been substantial
friends, they might have levied any amount from the royal lady's bounty;
kingdoms would have been slight gifts in her eyes, and _that_ would soon
have been objected to by her conqueror. But her argument is, that the
people to whom such gifts would be commensurate are mere _modish_
friends, persons known to us on terms of bare civility, people with whom
we exchange salutations in the street, or occasional calls, what now we
call acquaintances, for whom in Shakespeare's time there was no
distinguishing expression.

Another case we remember at this moment in 'All's Well that Ends Well.'
It occurs in Act II., at the very opening of scene iii.; the particular
edition, the only one we can command at the moment, is an obscure one
published by Scott, Webster and Geary, Charterhouse Square, 1840, and we
mention it thus circumstantially because the passage is falsely
punctuated; and we have little doubt that in all other editions, whether
with or without the false punctuation, the syntax is generally
misapprehended. In reality, the false punctuation has itself grown out
of the false apprehension of the syntax, and not _vice versâ_. Thus the
words stand _literatim et punctuatim_: 'They say, miracles are past: and
we have our philosophical persons to make modern and familiar things,
supernatural and causeless.' The comma ought to have been placed after
'familiar,' the sense being this--and we have amongst us sceptical and
irreligious people to represent as trivial and of daily occurrence
things which in reality are supernatural and causeless (that is, not
lying amongst the succession of physical causes and effects, but sent as
miracles by the immediate agency of God). According to the true sense,
_things supernatural and causeless_ must be understood as the subject,
of which _modern and familiar_ is the predicate.


Mr. Grindon fancies that _frog_ is derived from the syllable [Greek:
trach (k)] of [Greek: batrachos]. This will cause some people to smile,
and recall Menage's pleasantry about Alfana, the man of Orlando; It is
true that _frog_ at first sight seems to have no letter in common except
the snarling letter (_litera canina_). But this is not so; the _a_ and
the _o_, the _s_ and the _k_, are perhaps essentially the same. And even
in the case where, positively and literally, not a single letter is
identical, it is odd, but undeniable, that the two words may be nearly
allied as mother and child. One instance is notorious, but it is worth
citing for a purpose of instructive inference. 'Journal,' as a French
word, or, if you please, as an English word--whence came that?
Unquestionably and demonstrably from the Latin word _dies_, in which,
however, visibly there is not one letter the same as any one of the
seven that are in journal. Yet mark the rapidity of the transition.
_Dies_ (a day) has for its derivative adjective _daily_ the word
_diurnus_. Now, the old Roman pronunciation of _diu_ was exactly the
same as _gio_, both being pronounced as our English _jorn_. Here, in a
moment, we see the whole--_giorno_, a day, was not derived directly from
_dies_, but secondarily through _diurnus_. Then followed _giornal_, for
a diary, or register of a day, and from that to French, as also, of
course, the English _journal_. But the _moral_ is, that when to the eye
no letter is the same, may it not be so to the ear? Already the _di_ of
_dies_ anticipates and enfolds the _giorno_.

Mr. Grindon justly remarks upon the tendency, in many instances, of the
German _ss_ to reappear in English forms as _t_. Thus _heiss_ (hot),
_fuss_ (foot), etc. These are Mr. Grindon's own examples, and a striking
confirmation occurs in the old English _hight_, used for _he was
called_, and again for the participle _called_, and again, in the 'Met.
Romanus,' for _I was called_: 'Lorde, he saide, I highth Segramour.'
Now, the German is _heissen_ (to be called). And this is a tendency
hidden in many long ages: as, for instance, in Greek, every person must
remember the transition of [Greek: tt] and [Greek: ss] as in [Greek:
thattô], [Greek: thassô].


_On Pronunciation and Spelling._--If we are to surrender the old
vernacular sound of the _e_ in certain situations to a ridiculous
criticism of the _eye_, and in defiance of the protests rising up
clamorously from every quarter of old English scholarship, let us at
least know to _what_ we surrender. What letter is to usurp the vacant
seat? What letter? retorts the purist--why, an _e_, to be sure. An _e_?
And do you call _that_ an _e_? Do you pronounce 'ten' as if it were
written 'tun', or 'men' as if written 'mun'? The 'Der' in Derby,
supposing it tolerable at all to alter its present legitimate sound,
ought, then, to be pronounced as the 'Der' in the Irish name Derry, not
as 'Dur'; and the 'Ber' in Berkeley not as 'Bur,' but as the 'Ber' in
Beryl. But the whole conceit has its origin in pure ignorance of English
archæology, and in the windiest of all vanities, viz., the attempt to
harmonize the spelling and the pronunciation of languages.

Naturally, it fills one with contempt for these 'Derby' purists to find
that their own object, the very purpose they are blindly and
unconsciously aiming at, has been so little studied or steadily
contemplated by them in anything approaching to its whole extent. Why,
upon the principle which they silently and virtually set up, though
carrying it out so contradictorily (driving out an _a_ on the plea that
it is not an _e_, only to end by substituting, _and without being
aware_, the still remoter letter _u_), the consequence must be that the
whole language would go to wreck. Nine names out of every ten would need
tinkering. 'London,' for instance, no more receives the normal sound of
the _o_ in either of its syllables than does the _e_ in 'Derby.' The
normal sound of the _o_ is that heard in 'song,' 'romp,' 'homage,'
'drop.' Nevertheless, the sound given to the _o_ in 'London,'
'Cromwell,' etc., which strictly is the short sound of _u_ in 'lubber,'
'butter,' etc., is a secondary sound of _o_ in particular combinations,
though not emphatically its proper sound. The very same defence applies
to the _e_ in 'Berkeley,' etc. It is the legitimate sound of the English
_e_ in that particular combination, viz., when preceding an _r_, though
not its normal sound. But think of the wild havoc that would be made of
other more complex anomalies, if these purists looked an inch in
advance. Glocester or Gloucester, Worcester, Cirencester, Pontefract,
etc. What elaborate and monstrous pronunciations would they affix to
these names? The whole land would cease to recognise itself. And that
the purists should never have contemplated these veritable results, this
it is which seals and rivets one's contempt for them.

Now, if such harmony were at all desirable (whereas, on the contrary, we
should thus be carrying ruin into the traditions and obliteration into
the ethnological links of languages, industriously, in fact, throwing up
insuperable obstacles in the path of historical researches), it would be
far better, instead of adjusting the pronunciation to the imaginary
value of the spelling, inversely to adjust the spelling to the known and
established pronunciation, as a certain class of lunatics amongst
ourselves, viz., the _phonetic gang_, have for some time been doing
systematically.

Here, therefore, I hope is one fixed point. Here there is anchorage. The
usage is the rule, at any rate; and the law of analogy takes effect only
where _that_ cannot be decisively ascertained.


_The Latin Word 'Felix.'_--The Romans appear to me to have had no term
for _happy_, which argues that they had not the idea. _Felix_ is tainted
with the idea of success, and is thus palpably referred to life as a
competition, which for Romans every distinguished life was. In fact,
apart from his city the Roman was nothing. Too poor to have a villa or
any mode of retirement, it is clear that the very idea of Roman life
supposes for the vast majority a necessity of thick crowded intercourse,
without the possibility of solitude. I, for my peculiar constitution of
mind, to whom solitude has in all periods of life been more of a
necessity almost than air, view with special horror the life of a Roman
or Athenian. All the morning he had to attend a factious hustings or a
court--assemblies deliberative or judicial. Here only he was somebody,
and yet, however, somebody through others. Combining with one leader and
many underlings like himself, he also became a power; but in himself and
for himself, after all, he was consciously nothing. When Cicero speaks
of his _nunquam minus Solus quam cum solus_, he is announcing what he
feels to be, and knows will be, accepted as a very extraordinary fact.
For even _in rure_ it is evident that friends made it a duty of
friendship to seek out and relieve their rusticating friends.


_On the Distinction between 'Rhetorica utens' and 'Rhetorica
docens'._--It was a perplexity, familiar to the experience of the
Schoolmen, that oftentimes one does not know whether to understand by
the term _logic_ the act and process of reasoning involved and latent in
any series of connected propositions, or this same act and process
formally abstracting itself as an art and system of reasoning. For
instance, if you should happen to say, 'Dr. Isaac Watts, the English
Nonconformist, was a good man, and a clever man; but alas! for his
logic, what can his best friend say for it? The most charitable opinion
must pronounce it at the best so, so'--in such a case, what is it that
you would be understood to speak of? Would it be the general quality of
the Doctor's reasoning, the style and character of his philosophical
method, or would it be the particular little book known as 'The Doctor:
his _Logic_,' price 5s., bound in calf, and which you might be very shy
of touching with a pair of tongs, for fear of dimming their steel
polish, so long as your wife's eye was upon your motions? The same
ambiguity affects many other cases. For instance, if you heard a man
say, 'The _rhetoric_ of Cicero is not fitted to challenge much
interest,' you might naturally understand it of the particular style and
rhetorical colouring--which was taxed with being florid; nay, Rhodian;
nay, even Asiatic--that characterizes that great orator's compositions;
or, again, the context might so restrain the word as to _force_ it into
meaning the particular system or theory of rhetoric addressed to
Herennius, a system which (being traditionally ascribed to Cicero) is
usually printed amongst his works. Here, and in scores of similar cases,
lies often a trap for the understanding; but the Schoolmen evaded this
trap by distinguishing between 'Rhetorica _utens_,' and 'Rhetorica
_docens_,' between the rhetoric that laid down or delivered didactically
the elements of oratorical persuasion as an art to be learned, and
rhetoric, on the other hand, as a creative energy that _wielded_ these
elements by the mouth of Pericles in the year 440 B. C., or by the mouth
of Demosthenes, 340 B. C.; between rhetoric the scholastic art and
rhetoric the heaven-born _power;_ between the rhetoric of Aristotle that
illuminated the solitary student, and the rhetoric of Demosthenes that
ran along in rolling thunders to the footstool of Artaxerxes' throne.
Oh, these dear spindle-shanked Schoolmen! they were people, respected
reader, not to be sneezed at. What signifies having spindle-shanks?


_Synonyms._--A representative and a delegate, according to Burke, are
identical; but there is the same difference as between a person who on
his own results of judgment manages the interests of X, and a person
merely reporting the voice of X. Probably there never was a case which
so sharply illustrated the liability of goodish practical understanding
to miss, to fail in seeing, an object lying right before the eyes; and
that is more wonderful in cases where the object is not one of
multitude, but exists almost in a state of insulation. At the coroner's
inquest on a young woman who died from tight-lacing, acting, it was
said, in combination with a very full meal of animal food, to throw the
heart out of position, Mr. Wakely pronounced English or British people
all distorted in the spine, whereas _Continental_ people were all right.
Continental! How unlimited an idea! Why, it meant nothing; it defines
nothing, limits nothing, excludes nothing. Who or what is Continental?
Apparently it means anyone out of 240 millions not being one of the 27
millions in the Britannides. Every man escapes an insane folly who
happens to breathe an air E. (N. E., S. E., N. N. E., S. S. E., etc.) of
the Britannides. Vanity, the inevitable wish to improve, or rather to
avail, one's self of a natural means offered for deepening and marking
out the natural outline of the shape, _i.e._, of the sexual
characteristics, has no effect, dies out, the instant that a family is
one of those who have the privilege of basking anywhere 2,000 miles E.
or 2,000 miles N. and S.!


1. An ideal carver is described: he, after carving, 'is as cool and
collected as ever, and _assists_ the portions he has carved with as much
grace as he displayed in carving the fowl.'

2. Further on, when contrasting, not the carvers, but the things _to be_
carved, coming to '_Neck of Veal_,' he says of the carver: 'Should the
vertebræ have not been jointed by the butcher, you would find yourself
in the position of the ungraceful carver, being compelled to exercise a
degree of strength which should never be suffered to appear, very
possibly, too, _assisting_ gravy in a manner not contemplated by the
person unfortunate enough to receive it.'


_Genteel_ is the vulgarest and most plebeian of all known words.
Accordingly (and strange it is that the educated users of this word
should not perceive that fact), aristocratic people--people in the most
undoubted _élite_ of society as to rank or connections--utterly ignore
the word. They are aware of its existence in English dictionaries; they
know that it slumbers in those vast repositories; they even apprehend
your meaning in a vague way when you employ it as an epithet for
assigning the pretensions of an individual or a family. Generally it is
understood to imply that the party so described is in a position to make
morning calls, to leave cards, to be presentable for anything to the
contrary apparent in manners, style of conversation, etc. But these and
other suggestions still leave a vast area unmapped of blank charts in
which the soundings are still doubtful.

The word 'genteel' is so eminently vulgar apparently for this reason,
that it presents a non-vulgar distinction under a gross and vulgar
conception of that distinction. The true and central notion, on which
the word revolves, is elevating; but, by a false abstraction of its
elements, it is degraded. And yet in parts of this island where the
progress of refinement is torpid, and the field of vision is both narrow
and unchanging in all that regards the _nuances_ of manners, I have
remarked that the word 'genteel' maintains its old advantageous
acceptation; and as a proof of this, eminent and even revolutionary
thinkers born and bred in such provincial twilight, use the word as if
untainted and hardly aware that it is flyblown.

Among ourselves it is certain that a peculiar style of gossip, of
babble, and of miniature intriguing, invests the atmosphere of little
'townishness,' such as often entangles the more thoughtful and
dignified of the residents in troublesome efforts at passive resistance
or active counter-action. In dealing with this matter, Mr. Wordsworth
instanced Northampton and Nottingham; but a broader difference could
hardly be than between these towns. And just as 'genteel' remains the
vulgarest of all words, so the words 'simple' and 'simplicity,' amongst
all known words, offer the most complex and least simple of ideas.

Having made this deprecation on behalf of my own criminality in using
such a word as 'genteel,' I go on to say that whilst Northampton was
(and _is_, I believe) of all towns the most genteel, Nottingham for more
than two centuries has been the most insurrectionary and in a scarlet
excess democratic. Nottingham, in fact, has always resembled the
Alexandria of ancient days; whilst Northampton could not be other than
aristocratic as the centre of a county more thickly gemmed by the
ancestral seats of our nobility than any beside in the island. Norwich,
again, though a seat of manufacturing industry, has always been modified
considerably by a literary body of residents.


'Mein alter Herr' (von Stein) 'pflegte dann wohl scherzend zu sagen: Ich
müsse von irgend eine Hexe meinen Altem als ein Wechselbalg in's Nest
gelegt seyn; ich gehöre offenbar einem Stamm amerikanischer wilden an,
und habe noch die Hühnerhundnase zum Auswittern des verschiedenen
Blutes.' Arndt, speaking of his power to detect at sight (when seen at a
distance) Russians, English, etc., says that Von Stein replied thus in
his surprise. But I have cited the passage as one which amply
illustrates the suspensive form of sentence in the German always
indicated by a colon (:), thus: 'zu sagen: Ich müsse'--to say that I
must have been (p. 164).


The active sense of _fearful_, viz., that which causes and communicates
terror--not that which receives terror--was undoubtedly in Shakespeare's
age, but especially amongst poets, the preponderant sense. Accordingly I
am of opinion that even in neutral cases, such as are open indifferently
to either sense, viz., that which affrights, or that which is itself
affrighted, the bias in Shakespeare's interpretation of the feeling lay
towards the former movement. For instance, in one of his sonnets:

    'Oh, fearful meditation! where, alas!'

the true construction I believe to be--not this: Oh, though _deriving_
terror from the circumstances surrounding thee, _suffering_ terror from
the _entourage_ of considerations pursuing thee; but this: Oh, thought
impressing and creating terror, etc. A 'fearful' agent in Shakespeare's
use is not one that shrinks in alarm from the act, but an agent that
causes others to shrink; not panic-struck, but panic-striking.


Miss Edgeworth, let me remark, commits trespasses on language that are
really past excusing. In one place she says that a man 'had a
_contemptible_ opinion' of some other man's understanding. Such a
blunder is not of that class which usage sanctions, and an accuracy not
much short of pedantry would be argued in noticing: it is at once
illiterate and vulgar in the very last degree. I mean that it is common
amongst vulgar people, and them only. It ranks, for instance, with the
common formula of '_I_ am agreeable, if you prefer it.'


Style is the disentangling of thoughts or ideas reciprocally involved in
each other.

Religion under any of its aspects, revealing or consoling--religion in
connection with any of its affinities, ethics or metaphysics, when
_self_-evoked by a person of earnest nature, not imposed from without by
the necessities of monastic life, not caught as a contagion from the
example of friends that surround you, argues some 'vast volcanic agency'
moving at subterraneous depths below the ordinary working mind of daily
life, and entitled by its own intrinsic grandeur to ennoble the
curiosity (else a petty passion) which may put questions as to its
origin. In any case of religion arising, as a spontaneous birth, in the
midst of alien forces, it is inevitable to ask for its _why_ and its
_whence_. Religion considered as a sentiment of devotion, as a yearning
after some dedication to an immeasurable principle of that noblest
temple among all temples--'the upright heart and pure,' or religion,
again, as the apprehension of some mighty synthesis amongst truths dimly
perceived heretofore amidst separating clouds, but now brought into
strict indissoluble connection, proclaims a revolution so great that it
is otherwise not to be accounted for than as the breaking out of a germ
of the supernatural in man as a seed from a hitherto barren soil.


Sin is that secret word, that dark _aporréton_ of the human race,
undiscoverable except by express revelation, which having once been laid
in the great things of God as a germinal principle, has since blossomed
into a vast growth of sublime ideas known only to those nations who have
lived under the moulding of Scriptural truth--and comprehending _all_
functions of the Infinite operatively familiar to man. Yes, I affirm
that there is no form through which the Infinite reveals itself in a
sense comprehensible by man and adequate to man; that there is no
sublime agency which _compresses_ the human mind from infancy so as to
mingle with the moments of its growth, positively none but has been in
its whole origin--in every part--and exclusively developed out of that
tremendous mystery which lurks under the name of sin.

Yes, I affirm that even in its dreams every Christian child is invested
by an atmosphere of sublimity unknown to the greatest of Pagan
philosophers: that golden rays reach it by two functions of the
Infinite; and that these, in common with those emanations of the
Infinite that do not settle upon the mind until mature years, are all
projections--derivations or counterpositions--from the obscure idea of
sin; could not have existed under any previous condition; and for a
Pagan mind would not have been intelligible.


_Sin._--It is not only that the Infinite arises as part of the entire
system resting on sin, but specifically from sin apart from its
counterforces or reactions, viz., from sin as a thing, and the only
thing originally shadowy and in a terrific sense mysterious.


_Stench._--I believe that under Burke's commentary, this idea would
become a high test of the doctrine of the Infinite. He pronounces it
sublime, or sublime in cases of intensity. Now, first of all, the
intense state of everything or anything is but a mode of power, that
idea or element or moment of greatness under a varied form. Here, then,
is nothing _proper_ or separately peculiar to stench: it is not stench
_as_ stench, but stench as a mode or form of sensation, capable
therefore of intensification. It is but a case under what we may suppose
a general Kantian rule--that every sensation runs through all
gradations, from the lowest or most obscure and nascent to the highest.
Secondly, however, pass over to the contemplation of stench _as_ stench:
then I affirm--that as simply expounding the decay, and altering or
spoiling tendency or state of all things--simply as a register of
imperfection, and of one which does not (as ruins to the eye) ever put
on a pleasing transitional aspect, it is merely disagreeable, but also
at the same time mean. For the imperfection is merely transitional and
fleeting, not absolute. First, midst and last, it is or can be grand
when it reverts or comes round upon its mediating point, or point of
reaction.


The arrangement of my Infinite must be thus: After having expounded the
idea of holiness which I must show to be now potent, proceed to show
that the Pagan Gods did not realize and did not meet this idea; that
then came the exposure of the Pagan Gods and the conscious presence of a
new force among mankind, which opened up the idea of the Infinite,
through the awakening perception of holiness.


I believe that in every mode of existence, which probably is always by
an incarnation, the system of flesh is made to yield the organs that
express the alliance of man with the Infinite. Thus the idea of mystery,
[Greek: aporrêta], finds its organ of expression in the sensualities of
the human race. Again, the crime, whatever it were, and the eternal
pollution is expressed in these same organs. Also, the prolongation of
the race so as to find another system is secured by the same organs.


Generally, that is, for a million against a unit, the awful mystery by
which the fearful powers of death, and sorrow, and pain, and sin are
locked into parts of a whole; so as, in fact, to be repetitions,
reaffirmations of each other under a different phase--this is nothing,
does not exist. Death sinks to a mere collective term--a category--a
word of convenience for purposes of arrangement. You depress your hands,
and, behold! the system disappears; you raise them, it reappears. This
is nothing--a cipher, a shadow. Clap your hands like an Arabian girl,
and all comes back. Unstop your ears, and a roar as of St. Lawrence
enters: stop your ears, and it is muffled. To and fro; it is and it is
not--is not and is. Ah, mighty heaven, that such a mockery should cover
the whole vision of life! It is and it is not; and on to the day of your
death you will still have to learn what is the truth.

The eternal now through the dreadful loom is the overflowing future
poured back into the capacious reservoir of the past. All the active
element lies in that infinitesimal _now_. The future is not except by
relation; the past is not at all, and the present but a sign of a nexus
between the two.


God's words require periods, so His counsels. He cannot precipitate
them any more than a man in a state of happiness _can_ commit suicide.
Doubtless it is undeniable that a man may arm his hand with a sword: and
that his flesh will be found penetrable to the sword, happy or not. But
this apparent physical power has no existence, no value for a creature
having a double nature: the moral nature not only indisposes him to use
his power, but really creates a far greater antagonist power.


This God--too great to be contemplated steadily by the loftiest of human
eyes; too approachable and condescending to be shunned by the meanest in
affliction: realizing thus in another form that reconcilement of
extremes, which St. Paul observed: far from all created beings, yet also
very near.


'A conviction that they needed a Saviour was growing amongst men.' How?
In what sense? Saviour from what? You can't be saved from nothing. There
must be a danger, an evil threatening, before even in fancy you can
think of a deliverer. Now, what evil was there existing to a Pagan? Sin?
Monstrous! No such idea ever dawned upon the Pagan intellect. Death?
Yes; but that was inalienable from his nature. Pain and disease? Yes;
but these were perhaps inalienable also. Mitigated they might be, but it
must be by human science, and the progress of knowledge. Grief? Yes; but
this was inalienable from life. Mitigated it might be, but by superior
philosophy. From what, then, was a Saviour to save? If nothing to save
from, how any Saviour? But here arises as the awful of awfuls to me, the
deep, deep exposure of the insufficient knowledge and sense of what is
peculiar to Christianity. To imagine some sense of impurity, etc.,
leading to a wish for a Saviour in a Pagan, is to defraud Christianity
of all its grandeur. If Paganism could develop the want, it is not at
all clear that Paganism did not develop the remedy. Heavens! how
deplorable a blindness! But did not a Pagan lady feel the insufficiency
of earthly things for happiness? No; because any feeling tending in that
direction would be to her, as to all around her, simply a diseased
feeling, whether from dyspepsia or hypochondria, and one, whether
diseased or not, worthless for practical purposes. It would have to be a
Christian lady, if something far beyond, something infinite, were not
connected with it, depending on it. But if this were by you ascribed to
the Pagan lady, then _that_ is in other words to make her a Christian
lady already.


_Exhibition of a Roman Dialogue on Sin._--What! says the ignorant and
unreflecting modern Christian. Do you mean to tell me that a Roman,
however buried in worldly objects, would not be startled at hearing of a
Saviour? Now, hearken.

ROMAN. Saviour! What do you mean? Saviour for what? In good faith, my
friend, you labour under some misconception. I am used to rely on myself
for all the saving that I need. And, generally speaking, if you except
the sea, and those cursed north-east winds, I know of no particular
danger.

CHRISTIAN. Oh, my friend, you totally mistake the matter. I mean saving
from sin.

ROMAN. Saving from a fault, that is--well, what sort of a fault? Or, how
should a man, that you say is no longer on earth, save me from any
fault? Is it a book to warn me of faults that He has left?

CHRISTIAN. Why, yes. Not that He wrote Himself; but He talked, and His
followers have recorded His views. But still you are quite in the dark.
Not faults, but the fountain of all faults, that is what He will save
you from.

ROMAN. But how? I can understand that by illuminating my judgment in
general He might succeed in making me more prudent.

CHRISTIAN. 'Judgment,' 'prudent'--these words show how wide by a whole
hemisphere you are of the truth. It is your will that He applies His
correction to.

ROMAN. 'Will!' why I've none but peaceable and lawful designs, I assure
you. Oh! I begin to see. You think me a partner with those pirates that
we just spoke to.

CHRISTIAN. Not at all, my friend. I speak not of designs or intentions.
What I mean is, the source of all desires--what I would call your wills,
your whole moral nature.

ROMAN (_bridling_). Ahem! I hope Roman nature is quite as little in need
of improvement as any other. There are the Cretans; they held up their
heads. Accordingly they had their fire institutions, and that true
institution against bribery and luxury, and all such stuff. They fancied
themselves impregnable. Why, bless you! even Marcus Tullius, that was a
prosing kind of man and rather peevish about such things, could not keep
in the truth. 'Why, Cato, my boy,' says he, 'you talk.' And to hear you,
bribery and luxury would not leave one a stick to fight for. Why, now,
these same Cretans--lord! we took the conceit out of them in
twenty-five minutes. No more time, I assure you, did it cost three of
our cohorts to settle the whole lot of them.

CHRISTIAN. My friend, you are more and more in the dark. What I mean is
not present in your senses, but a disease.

ROMAN. Oh, a disease! that's another thing. But where?

CHRISTIAN. Why, it affects the brain and the heart.

ROMAN. Well, now, one at a time. Take the brain--we have a disease, and
we treat it with white hellebore. There may be a better way. But answer
me this. If you are generally affected, what right have you to bring, as
you are supposing, a diseased brain to a sound one? We Romans are all
sound--sound as a bell.

Then Christian goes on to the history of the fall. But the whole would
be self-baffled and construed away from want of sin as the antithesis of
holiness.


_Why St. Paul and the Athenians did not come to an Understanding._--So,
again, if you think that St. Paul had a chance with the Athenians. If he
had, it would tax his divine benevolence to see that he forbore to
pursue it. This attempt shows that he was under a misconception. He
fancied a possibility of preaching a pure religion. What followed? He
was, he must have been defeated. That is, practically, else why did he
not persist? But his confutation was the factual confutation of
experience. It was no go. That he found too surely. But why? I am sure
that he never found out. Enough that he felt--that under a strong
instinct he misgave--a deep, deep gulf between him and them, so that
neither could he make a way to their sense, nor they, except
conjecturally, to his. For, just review the case. What was the [Greek:
euangelion], the good tidings, which he announced to man? What burthen
of hope? What revelation of a mystery of hope arising out of a deeper
mystery of despair? He announced a deliverer. Deliverer! from what?
Answer that--from what? Why, from evil, you say. Evil! of what kind?
Why, you retort, did not the Pagans admit that man was lying under evil?
Not at all; nothing of the kind. But you are sure you have heard of such
things? Very likely. And now you are forced back upon your arguments you
remember specially that evil as to its origin was a favourite
speculation of theirs. Evil, in its most comprehensive designation,
whence is it? How came it? Now, mark, even to that extent, viz., the
extent indicated by this problem, the ancients had no conception of evil
corresponding to, no, nor dimly approaching to, a correspondence with
ours. They had no ineffable standard of purity; how, then, any function
of impurity? They had no ineffable doctrine of pain or suffering
answering to a far more realized state of perception, and, therefore,
unimaginably more exquisite; how, then, could they raise a question on
the nature or fountains of such pains? They executed no synthesis, and
could execute none upon the calamities of life; they never said in
ordinary talk that this was a world of sorrow, either apostrophizing a
newborn child, or a world of disappointment, bemoaning a mature victim;
neither as in the anguish of meditative reflection, nor in the prudence
of extenuating apology. The grand _sanctus_ which arises from human
sensibility, Perish empires and the crowns of kings, etc., first arose
in connection with Christianity.[30] Life was a good life; man was a
prosperous being. Hope for men was his natural air; despondency the
element of his own self-created folly. Neither could it be otherwise.
For, besides that, it would be too immeasurable a draught of woe to say
in one breath that this only was the crux or affirmation of man's fate,
and yet that this also was wretched _per se_; not accidentally made
wretched by imprudence, but essentially and irrevocably so by necessity
of its nature. Besides all this, which has a lurking dependency upon
man's calculations of what is safe, he sees that this mode of thinking
would leave him nothing; yet even that extreme consequence would not
check some honest or sincere or desperate minds from uttering their
convictions that life really _was_ this desperate game--much to lose
and nothing in the best case to win. So far there would have been a
dangerous gravitation at all times to the sad conclusion of Paganism.
But, meanwhile, this dangerous gravitation was too dangerous, and
Providence has deeply counteracted it by principles laid down in human
nature. I affirm that where the ideas of man, where the possible
infinities are not developed, then also the exorbitant on the other
field is strongly pulled up. No ideals of evil can take place except
under ideals of happiness that passeth all understanding. No synthesis
can ever be executed, that is, no annumeration of A, B, C into a common
total, viewed as elements tending to a common unity, unless previously
this unity has been preconceived, because the elements are not elements,
viz., original constituents of a representative whole (a series tending
to a summation), unless that which is constituted--that whole--is
previously given in idea. Since A and B and C could not be viewed as
tending to a unity, having no existence except through them, unless
previously that unity had existed for the regulation and eduction of its
component elements. And this unity in the case of misery never could
have been given unless far higher functions than any which could endure
Paganism, or which Paganism could endure. Until the sad element of a
diseased will is introduced, until the affecting notion is developed of
a fountain in man himself welling up the misery for ever, no idea of
misery could arise. Suffering is limited and transitory. What pain is
permanent in man? Even the deepest laceration of the human heart, that
which is inflicted by the loss of those who were the pulses of our
hearts, is soothed (if never wholly healed) by time. One agency of time
would avail for this effect were there no other. The features of the
individual whom we mourn grow dimmer and dimmer as time advances; and,
_pari passu_, the features of places and collateral objects and
associated persons from whom reverberated these afflicting reminiscences
of the lost object.

I return: Deliverer from what? From suffering or misery. But that was
not acknowledged, nor could have been, we could see no misery as a
hypothesis except in these two modes: First, as a radication in man by
means of something else, some third thing. Secondly, as a synthesis--as
a gathering under a principle which must act prior to the gathering in
order to provoke it. (The synthesis must be rendered possible and
challenged by the _à priori_ unity which otherwise constitutes that
unity.) As a metaphysical possibility evil was recognised through its
unfathomable nature. But this was because such a nature already
presupposed a God's nature, realizing his own ends, stepped in with
effect. For the highest form--the normal or transcendent form--of virtue
to a Pagan, was in the character of citizen. Indeed, the one sole or
affirmative form of virtue lay in this sole function, viz., of public,
of patriotic virtue. Since here only it was possible to introduce an
_additional_ good to the world. All other virtue, as of justice between
individual and individual, did but redress a previous error, sometimes
of the man himself, sometimes of social arrangement, sometimes of
accident. It was a _plus_ which balanced and compensated a pre-existing
_minus_--an action _in regressu_, which came back with prevailing power
upon an action _in progressu_. But to be a patriot was to fulfil a call
of the supererogatory heart--a great nisus of sympathy with the one sole
infinite, the sole practical infinite that man pre-Christian ever could
generate for his contemplation. Now, therefore, it followed that the
idea of virtue here only found its realization. Virtue, in fact, was not
derivatively or consequentially connected with patriotism, it was
_immanent_; not transitively associated by any links whatever, but
immanently intertwisted, indwelling in the idea. Therefore it happened
that a man, however heartsick of this tumid, bladdery delusion, although
to him it was a balloon, by science punctured, lacerated, collapsing,
trailed through ditch and mud under the rough handling and the fearful
realities of life, yet he durst not avow his private feelings. That
would have been even worse than with us: it would have been to proclaim
virtue and vice mere bubbles and chimeras. He who really thinks so even
we reasonably suspect of _practical_ indifference unless when we believe
him to speak as a misanthrope.

The question suppose to commence as to the divine mission of Christ. And
the feeble understanding is sure to think this will be proved best by
proving the subject of this doubt to have been a miracle-working power.
And of all miracles, to have mastered (not merely escaped or evaded)
death will be in his opinion the greatest. So that if Christ could be
proved to have absolutely conquered death, _i.e._, to have submitted to
death, but only to recoil from his power and overthrow it, to have died
and subsequently to have risen again, will, _à fortiori_, prove Him to
have been sent of God.

Not so. All and every basis of credibility must be laid in the _moral_
nature, where the thing to be believed is important, _i.e._, moral. And
I therefore open with this remark absolutely _zermalmende_ to the common
intellect: That from a holy faith you may infer a power of resurrection,
but not from a power of resurrection fifty times repeated can we infer a
holy faith. What in the last result is the thing to be proved? Why, a
holy revelation, not of knowledge, but of things practical; of agenda,
not scienda. It is essential that this holy should also be _new_,
_original_, _revelatum_. Because, else, the divinest things which are
_connata_ and have been common to all men, point to no certain author.
They belong to the dark foundations of our being, and cannot challenge a
trust, faith, or expectation as suspended upon any particular individual
man whatever.

Here, then, arises the [Greek: prôtontokinon]. Thick darkness sits on
every man's mind as to Christ's revelation. He fancies that it amounts
to this: 'Do what is good. Do your duty. Be good.' And with this vague
notion of the doctrine, natural is it that he should think it as old as
the hills. The first step to a saner view is, to understand--if a man
has sense enough to reach so high--that the subtlest discoveries ever
made by man, all put together, do not make one wave of that Atlantic as
to novelty and originality which lies in the moral scheme of
Christianity. I do not mean in the total scheme of Christianity,
redemption, etc. No, but in the ethics.

All ethics that ever Greece refined or Rome illustrated, was, and could
be, only the same universal system of social ethics--ethics proper and
exclusive to man and man _inter se_, with no glimpse of any upward
relationship.

Now Christianity looks upward for the first time. This in the first
place. Secondly, out of that upward look Christianity looks secondarily
down again, and reacts even upon the social ethics in the most
tremendous way.


_For my Book on the Relations of Christianity to Man._--S. T. C. cites
Jeremy Taylor, etc., for horrible passages on the gloomy state of the
chances for virtuous Pagans. S. T. C. in a more liberal generation is
shocked; and of course in his readers as in himself secretly, he
professes more liberal ideas. Aye, but how is he entitled to these
ideas? For, on further consideration, it is not Cicero only, or
Epictetus only, that would suffer under this law of Christianity viewed
in its reagency, but also Abraham, David, Isaiah, Ezekiel, Hezekiah.
Because, how could they benefit by a Redeemer not yet revealed--nay, by
a Redeemer not even existing? For it is not the second person in the
Trinity--not He separately and abstractedly--that is the Redeemer, but
that second person incarnated. St. Paul apparently wished to smuggle
this tremendous question into a fraudulent solution, by mixing up
Abraham (with others pre-Christian and Christian) into the long array of
those whose _Faith_ had saved them. But faith in whom? General faith in
God is not the thing, it is faith in Jesus Christ; and we are solemnly
told in many shapes that no other name was given on earth through which
men could be delivered. Indeed, if not, how is the Messiah of such
exclusive and paramount importance to man? The Messiah was as yet (viz.,
in Abraham's time) a prophecy--a dim, prophetic outline of one who
_should_ be revealed. But if Abraham and many others could do without
Him, if this was a dispensable idea, how was it in any case, first or
last, indispensable? Besides, recur to the theory of Christianity. Most
undeniably it was this, that neither of the two elements interested in
man could save him; not God; He might have power, but His purity
revolted. Power (or doubtfully so), but no will. Not man--for he, having
the will, had no power. God was too holy; manhood too _un_holy. Man's
gifts, applicable, but insufficient. God's sufficient, but
inapplicable. Then came the compromise. How if man could be engrafted
upon God? Thus only, and by such a synthesis, could the ineffable
qualities of God be so co-ordinated with those of man.


Suppose even that a verbal inspiration could have been secured--secured,
observe, against _gradual_ changes in language and against the
reactionary corruption of concurrent versions, which it would be
impossible to guarantee as also enjoying such an inspiration (since, in
that case, _what_ barrier would divide mine or anybody's wilfully false
translations from that pretending to authority? I repeat _what_? None is
conceivable, since what could you have beyond the assurance of the
translator, even which could only guarantee his intentions)--here is a
cause of misinterpretation amounting to ruin, viz., after being read for
centuries as if practically meant for our guidance, such and such a
chapter (_e.g._, Jael and Sisera), long proscribed by the noble as a
record of abominable perfidy, has at length been justified on the ground
that it was never meant for anything else. Thus we might get rid of
David, etc., were it not that for his flexible obedience to the _clerus_
he has been pronounced the man after God's own heart.

Is it not dreadful that at the very vestibule of any attempt to execute
the pretended law of God and its sentences to hell we are interrupted by
one case in every three as exceptional? Of the deaths, one in three are
of children under five. Add to these surely _very_ many up to twelve or
thirteen, and _many_ up to eighteen or twenty, then you have a law which
suspends itself for one case in every two.

_Note in the argument drawn from perishableness of language._ Not only
(which I have noted) is any language, _ergo_ the original, Chaldæan,
Greek, etc., perishable even for those who use it, but also the vast
openings to error which all languages open to translators form a separate
source of error in translators, viz.:

1. The old one on my list that for them the guidance of inspiration has
ceased, else, if not, you must set up an inspiration separately to
translators, since, if you say--No, not at all, why, which then?

2. The uncertainty of a foreign language even in a day contemporary with
the original writer, and therefore over and above what arises from lapse
of time and gradual alterations.


_On Human Progress._--Oftentimes it strikes us all that this is so
insensible as to elude observation the very nicest. Five years add
nothing, we fancy. Now invert your glass. In 1642 Englishmen are
fighting for great abstract principles. In 1460-83 (_i.e._, 100 + 17 +
42 years before, or 159 years) they are fighting for persons, for rival
candidates. In 1460 they could not have conceived more than an Esquimaux
can entertain a question about the constitution of lyric poetry, or the
differential principles of English and Greek tragedy, the barest
approximation to questions that in 1642 are grounds of furious quarrel,
of bloody quarrel, of extermination. Now then, looking forward, you
would see from year to year little if any growth; but inverting your
glass, looking back from the station of 1642 to 1460, you see a progress
that if subdivided amongst all the 159 years would give to each _x_/0 as
its quota, _i.e._ infinity. In fact, it is like the progression from
nothing to something. It is--creation.

All the body of the Christian world would fly out in a rage if you
should say that Christianity required of you many things that were easy,
but one thing that was _not_. Yet this is undoubtedly true; it requires
you to _believe_, and even in the case where you know what it is to
believe, and so far are free from perplexity, you have it not in your
own power to ensure (though you can influence greatly) your own power to
believe. But also great doubt for many (and for all that are not
somewhat metaphysical) attends the knowledge of what is believing.


As to my mother's fancy that Sir W. Jones had found in the East proofs
of Christianity, having gone out an infidel.

To do her justice, never once after she had adopted a theory of
Christianity did she inquire or feel anxious about its proof. But to
review the folly of this idea.

1. That Christianity there where it reigned and was meant to reign
should be insufficient in its proofs; but that in a far distant land,
lurking in some hole or corner, there should be proofs of its truth,
just precisely where these proofs were not wanted. And again, that these
should be reserved for one scholar rambling into a solitary path, where
in a moral sense _nobody_ could follow him (for it _is_ nobody--this or
that oriental scholar). And we are sure that his proof was not of that
order to shine by its own light, else it would have resounded through
England.

2. That for many hundreds of years Christianity should have been
received, generation after generation should have lived under its vital
action, upon no sufficient argument, and suddenly such an argument
should turn up as a reward to a man in a country not Christian for being
more incredulous than his neighbours; how impossible!

That fraudulent argument which affects to view the hardships of an
adventurous life and its perils as capable of one sole impression--that
of repulsion--and secondly as the sole circumstances about such
adventures, injures from the moment when it is perceived: not

1. The writer only; no matter for him, worthless liar, how much he sinks
in the opinion of his readers: but

2. The Apostles. Now see the injury of falsehood. Suddenly it snaps, and
with a great reaction causes a jar to the whole system, which in
ordinary minds it is never likely to recover. The reason it is not
oftener perceived is that people read such books in a somnolent,
inactive state of mind, one-tenth coming to a subject on which they have
already made up their minds, and open to no fresh impressions, the other
nine-tenths caring not one straw about the matter, as reading it in an
age of irreflectiveness and purely through an act of obedience to their
superiors, else not only does this hypocritical attempt to varnish give
way all at once, and suddenly (with an occasion ever after of doubt, and
causing a reflection to any self-sufficient man, suddenly coming to
perceive that he has been cheated, and with some justification for
jealousy thenceforwards to the maker up of a case), but also it robs the
Apostles of the human grace they really possessed. For if we suppose
them armed against all temptations, snares, seductions, by a
supernatural system of endowments, this is but the case of an
angel--nay, not of an angel, for it is probable that when an angel
incarnated himself, or one of the Pagan deities, who was obliged first
to incarnate himself before he could act amongst men, or so much as be
seen by men, he was bound by all the defects of man, _i.e._, he could
choose only an ideal, so far ideal as to elude the worst effects from
vice, intemperance, etc. The angel who wrestled with Jacob probably did
his best; he was a stout fellow, but so was the patriarch. The very
condition of incarnation, and this because the mere external form
already includes limitations (as of a fish, not to fly; of a man, not to
fly, etc.) probably includes as a _necessity_, not as a choice, the
adoption of all evils connected with the nature assumed. Even the Son of
God, once incarnated, was not exempted from any evil of flesh; He grew,
passed through the peculiar infirmities of every stage up to mature
life; would have grown old, infirm, weak, had He lived longer; was
liable to death, the worst of all human evils, and was not, we may be
sure, exempted from any one fleshly desire with regard to sex, or
enemies, or companions, but because that divine principle, which also
_is in man_, yes, in every man the foulest and basest--this light which
the darkness comprehended not, and which in some is early extinguished,
but in _all_ fights fitfully with the winds and storms of this human
atmosphere, in Him was raised to a lustre unspeakable by His pure and
holy will.

If the Apostles were more celestially armed in any other sense than as
we are all armed from above by calling forth our better natures, if in
any other sense than as sorrow arms us by purifying our natures, as
sorrowful reflection, as meditation and earnest endeavours to resist our
angry instincts (which, on the contrary, how often do men _obey_ under
the vile pretence of being put by conscience on a painful duty), then, I
say, what were the Apostles to us? Why should we admire them? How can we
make them models of imitation? It is like that case of Anarcharsis the
Scythian.


It does certainly incense a Christian to think that stupid Mahommedans
should impute to us such _childish_ idolatries as that of God having a
son and heir--just as though we were barbarous enough to believe that
God was liable to old age--that the time was coming, however distant,
when somebody would say to him, 'Come, Sir,' or 'Come, my Lord, really
you are not what you were. It's time you gave yourself some ease
([Greek: euphêmi], time, indeed, that you resigned the powers to which
you are unequal), and let a younger man take the reins.' None but a
filthy barbarian could carry forward his thoughts so little as not to
see that this son in due time would find himself in the same
predicament.

Now mark how Christian lands would enforce this doctrine of unity by
horrid coercions. They hang, drown, burn, crucify those who deny it. So
that, be assured you are planting your corner-stone on the most windy of
delusions. You yourselves do not ascribe any merit to Mahommed separate
from that of revealing the unity of God. Consequently, if that is a
shaken craze arising from mere inability on his part, a little, a very
little information would have cut up by the very roots the whole
peculiarity of Islam. For if a wise man could have assembled these
conceited Arabians and told them: Great thieves, you fancy yourselves to
have shot far ahead of the Christians as to the point of unity, and if
you had I would grant that you had made a prodigious advance. But you
are deceiving quarrellers. It is all a word--mere smoke, that blinds
you. The Christian seems to affirm three Gods, and even to aggravate
this wickedness by calling one of them 'a Son,' thus seeming to accept
that monstrous notion that God is liable to old age and decrepitude, so
as to provide wisely against His own dotage. But all this is an error:
these three apparent Gods are but one, and in the most absolute sense
one.


The most shockingly searching, influential, and permanent blunder that
ever has affected the mind of man has been the fancy that a religion
includes a creed as to its [Greek: aporrhêta], and a morality; in short,
that it was doctrinal by necessity, enactory, and (which has been the
practical part of the blunder) therefore exclusive, because:

1. With our notion of a religion as essentially doctrinal, the very
first axiom about it is, that being true itself it makes all others
false. Whereas, the capital distinction of the Pagan was--that given,
supposing to be assumed, 10,000 religions--all must be true
simultaneously, all equally. When a religion includes any distinct
propositions offered to the understanding (that is, I think, resting
upon a principle or tendency to a consequence by way of differencing
from facts which also are for the understanding, but then barely to
contemplate not with a power of reacting on the understanding, for every
principle introduces into the mind that which may become a modification,
a restraint; whereas, a fact restrains nothing in the way of thought
unless it includes a principle), it would rise continually in its
exclusive power according to the number of those propositions. At first
it might exclude all but ten, eight, seven, and so on; finally, as
integrated it would exclude all.

2. If you ask on what principle a Pagan believed his religion, the
question to him was almost amusing and laughable. I will illustrate the
case. A man meets you who inquires in a hurried, suppose even in an
agitated way, whether you met a tall man, blind of one eye, dressed in
such a coloured dress, etc. Now, does it ever occur to you that the
inquirer is lying? Lying! Wherefore should he lie? Or again, if you say
that your house stands under a hill, that three out of four chimneys
smoke, and that you must indeed try some of the inventions for remedying
this annoyance, would any man in his senses think of speculating on the
possibility that all this should be a romance? Or, to come nearer in the
kind of fact, if a man represented his family fortune as having been
bequeathed by a maiden aunt in the last generation, would any man say
otherwise than that doubtless the man knew his own benefactors and
relatives best? On this same principle, when Christ was mentioned as the
divinity adored by a certain part of the Jews who were by way of
distinction called Christians, why should a Roman object? What motive
could he have for denying the existence or the divine existence of
Christ? Even the idea of dissent or schism, some Jews worshipping, some
protesting, would not much puzzle him. Something like it had occurred in
Pagan lands. Neptune and Athene had contended for Attica. And under the
slight inquiry which he would ever make, or listen to when made by
others, he might wonder at the rancour displayed by the protesting
party, but he would take it for granted that a divinity of some local
section had been unduly pushed into pre-eminence over a more strictly
epichorial divinity. He would go off with this notion, that whereas, the
elder Jews insisted on paying vows, etc., to a God called Jehovah, a
section sought to transfer that allegiance to a divinity called Christ.
If he were further pressed on the subject, he would fancy that very
possibly, as had been thought, found or imagined in the case of Syrian
deities or Egyptian, etc., that perhaps Christ might correspond to
Apollo, as Astarte to Diana, Neptune of Latium to the Poseidôn of
Greece. But if not, that would cause no scruple at all. Thus far it was
by possibility a mere affair of verbal difference. But suppose it
ascertained that in no point of the symbols surrounding the worship of
Christ, or the conception of His person, He could be identified with any
previously-known Pagan God--that would only introduce Him into the
matricula of Gods as a positive novelty. Nor would it have startled a
Roman to hear that in India or any country large enough there should be
a separate Pantheon of many thousand deities, _plus_ some other Pantheon
of divinities corresponding to their own. For Syria--but still more in
one section of Syrian Palestine--this would surprise him _quoad_ the
degree, not _quoad_ the principle. The Jew had a separate or peculiar
God, why not? No nation could exist without Gods: the very separate
existence of a people, trivial as it might be in power and wealth,
argued a tutelary God, but, of course, proportioned to the destinies at
least (and in part to the present size) of the country. Thus far no
difficulties at all. But the morality! Aye, but that would never be
accounted a part of religion. As well confound a science with religion.
Aye, but the [Greek: aporrhêta]. These would be viewed as the rites of
Adonis, or of Ceres; you could not warn him from his preconception that
these concerned only Jews. Where, therefore, lodged the offence? Why
here, as personalities--for such merely were all religions--the God must
be measured by his nation. So some Romans proposed to introduce Christ
into the Roman Pantheon. But what first exploded as a civil offence was
the demand of supremacy and the inconceivable principle set up of
incompatibility. This was mere folly.


A much more solemn, significant and prophetic meaning than the common
one may be secured to the famous passage in St. Matthew--'And thou shalt
call His name _Jesus_.' This injunction wears the most impressive
character belonging to heavenly adjuration, when it is thus confided to
the care and custody of a special angel, and in the very hour of
inauguration, and amongst the very birth-throes of Christianity. For in
two separate modes the attention is secretly pointed and solicited to
the grand serpentine artifice, which met and confronted the almost
insurmountable difficulty besetting Christianity on its very threshold:
First, by the record of the early _therapeutic_ miracles, since in that
way only, viz., by a science of healing, which the philosopher equally
with the populace recognised as resting upon inspiration from God, could
the magistrate and civil authority have been steadily propitiated;
secondly, by the very verbal suggestion couched in the name _Jesus_, or
_Healer_. At the most critical of moments an angel reveals himself, for
the purpose of saying '_Thou shalt call His name Jesus_'--and why Jesus?
Because, says the angel, 'He shall heal or cleanse His people from sin
as from a bodily disease.' Thus, in one and the same moment is suggested
prospectively to the early Christian, who is looking forward in search
of some adequate protection against the civil magistrate, and
theoretically and retrospectively is suggested to the Christian of our
own philosophizing days, that admirable resource of what by a shorthand
expression I will call _Hakimism_. The _Hakim_, the _Jesus_, the
_Healer_, comes from God. Mobs must not be tolerated. But neither must
the deep therapeutic inspirations of God be made of none effect, or
narrowed in their applications. And thus in one moment was the panic
from disease armed against the panic from insurgent mobs; the privileged
Hakim was marshalled against the privileged magistrate; and the deep
superstition, which saw, and not unreasonably, a demon raging in a
lawless mob, saw also a demon not less blind or cruel in the pestilence
that walked in darkness. And, as one magnet creates other magnets, so
also the Hakim, once privileged, could secretly privilege others. And
the physical Hakim could by no test or shibboleth be prevented from
silently introducing the spiritual Hakim. And thus, whilst thrones and
councils were tumultuating in panic, behold! suddenly the Christian
soldier was revealed amongst them as an armed man.


'_Écrasez l'infâme_,' I also say: and who is he? It would be mere
insanity to suppose that it could be _any_ teacher of moral truths. Even
I, who so much despise Socrates, could not reasonably call him
_l'infâme_.

But who, then, is _l'infâme_? It is he who, finding in those great ideas
which I have noticed as revelations from God, and which throw open to
the startled heart the heaven of heavens, in the purity, the holiness,
the peace which passeth all understanding, finding no argument of
divinity, then afterwards _does_ find it in the little tricks of
legerdemain, in conjuring, in præstigia. But here, though perhaps roused
a little to see the baseness of relying on these miracles, and also in
the rear a far worse argument against them, he still feels uncomfortable
at such words applied to things which Christ did. Christ could not
make, nor wished to make, that great which was inherently mean; that
relevant, which was originally irrelevant. If He did things in
themselves mean, it was because He suited Himself to mean minds,
incapable of higher views; wretches such as exist amongst us of modern
days by millions, on whom all His Divine words were thrown away,
wretches deaf and blind and besotted, to whom it was said in vain: 'He
that looketh upon a woman,' and what follows, creating by a rod of
divinity in man's heart a far superior ideal of the moral; who heard
with indifference His 'Bless those who persecute you;' yes, listened
unmoved to His 'Suffer little children to come unto Me;' who heard with
anger His 'In heaven there is neither marrying nor giving in marriage;'
who abhorred His great doctrine that the counsels of God were not read
in the events of things[31]; who slighted as trivial that prayer which a
wise man might study with profit for a thousand years; beasts, wretches,
that turned away deaf and blind, even as their sons turn away, from
these arguments of a truth far transcending all that yet had come
amongst men; but whilst trampling with their brutal hoofs upon such
flowers of Paradise, turned in stupid wonderment to some mere
legerdemain or jugglery.


_The Truth._--But what tongue can express, what scale can measure, the
awful change in man's relations to the unseen world? Where there had
been a blank not filled by anything, not by any smoke or dusky tarnish
of suspicion, not filled by so much as any shadowy outline or vague
phantom of possibility, _there_ was now seen rising, 'like Teneriffe or
Atlas'--say rather, by symbolizing the greatest of human interests by
the greatest of human visual objects, like the snowy peaks of the
Himalaya, peaks that by men's feelings are referred to the heavens
rather than to the earth; to the beings 'whose dwelling is no thick
flesh,' rather than to men who have in no age succeeded in scaling them;
and who in their steps to those mighty thrones have heard nothing but
dread crashes of sound--again to fade or vanish, the colossal form,
never the mighty idea of 'The Truth.'[32] Where there had been nothing,
a blank, a chasm, there stood in solemn proportions a new object for
man, called The Truth. Why was it called _The_ Truth? How could such an
idea arise? Many persons will be weak enough to fancy that, as [Greek:
hopoêtês] was sometimes an artifice of rhetoric for expressing the
exclusive supremacy of Homer, and as by a pure affectation and movement
of dissimulation a man was called by the title of _The Orator_, his own
favourite Greek or Roman thus affecting for the moment to know of no
other (for all such emphatic and exclusive uses of _the_ imply a
momentary annihilation of the competitors, as though in comparison of
the ideal exemplification these minor and approximating forms had no
existence--or at least, not _quoad hunc locum_--as 'the mountain in
Sicily' would rightly indicate Etna), on the same artificial principle
they may imagine rhetoricians to have denominated (or if not, to have
had it in their power to denominate) some one department of truth which
they wished to favour as _the_ truth. But this conventional denomination
would not avail, and for two reasons: First, that rival modes of truth
(physics against mathematics, rhetoric against music) would contest the
title, and no such denomination would have a basis of any but a sort of
courtesy or vicarious harmonious reality from the very first. Secondly,
that, standing in no relation whatever to God, every mode, form,
division or subdivision of truth merely intellectual would gain nothing
at all by such ostentatious arts. Algebra has been distinguished by
glorious names; so has the fancied knowledge of transmutation applied to
the metals; so, doubtless, has many a visionary speculation of magic;
so, again, has the ridiculous schwermerey of the Rabbis in particular
ages. But those are as transient and even for the moment as partial
titles as the titles of Invincible or Seraphic applied to scholastic
divines. Out of this idea the truth grew, next (suppose _x_) another
_Martyrdom_.

The difference between all human doctrines and this is as between a
marble statue and a quick thing. The statue may be better, and it may be
of better material; it may be of ivory, of marble, and amongst marbles
known to the ancient sculptors of several different kinds the most
prized; of silver gilt, of hollow gold, of massy gold, and in all
degrees of skill; but still one condition applies to all--whatever the
material, whoever the artist, the statue is inanimate, the breath of
life is not within its nostrils. Motion, spontaneity, action and
antagonist action, the subtle watch-work of the brain, the mighty
laboratory of the heart, vision, sensibility, self-propagated warmth,
pleasure, hope, memory, thought, liberty--not one of these divine gifts
does it possess. It is cold, icy, senseless, dull, inert matter. Let
Phidias have formed the statue, it is no better. Let the purest gold be
its material, it is no worthier than the meanest model in clay to the
valuation of the philosopher. And here, as in so many cases, the great
philosopher meets with the labouring man; both meet with the little
innocent child. All have the same undervaluation of the statue. And if
any man values it preposterously, it will be neither a great
philosopher, nor a labouring man with horny fists, nor a little innocent
and natural child. It will be some crazy simpleton, who dignifies
himself as a man of taste, as _elegans formarum spectator_, as one
having a judicious eye for the distinctions of form. But now, suddenly,
let one of the meanest of these statues begin to stir and shiver with
the mystery of life, let it be announced that something 'quick' is in
the form, let the creeping of life, the suffusion of sensibility, the
awful sense of responsibility and accountability ripen themselves, what
a shock--what a panic! What an interest--how profound--would diffuse
itself in every channel. Such is the ethics of God as contrasted with
the ethics of Greek philosophers. The only great thing ever done by
Greece or by Greek philosophers was the ethics. Yet, after all, these
were but integrations of the natural ethics implanted in each man's
heart. Integrations they were, but rearrangements--redevelopments from
some common source.


It is remarkable that the Scriptures, valuing clearness and fencing
against misunderstandings above all things, never suspend--there is no
[Greek: epochê] in the scriptural style of the early books. And,
therefore, when I first came to a text, 'If when,' I was thunderstruck,
and I found that this belongs to the more cultivated age of Hebrew
literature.


'_And the swine because it divideth the hoof, yet cheweth not the cud,
it is unclean unto you_' (Deut. xiv. 8). Now the obvious meaning is,
_primâ facie_, that the ground of its uncleanness was its dividing the
hoof. Whereas, so far from this, to divide the hoof is a ground of
cleanness. It is a fact, a _sine quâ non_--that is, a negative condition
of cleanness; but not, therefore, taken singly the affirmative or
efficient cause of cleanness. It must in addition to this chew the
cud--it must ruminate. Which, again, was but a _sine quâ non_--that is,
a negative condition, indispensable, indeed; whose absence could not be
tolerated in any case, but whose presence did not therefore, and as a
matter of course, avail anything. For the reverse case occurred in the
camel, hare, and rabbit. They _do_ chew the cud, the absence of which
habit caused the swine to be rejected, but then they 'divide not the
hoof.' Accordingly they were equally rejected as food with the swine.


We see the great Jewish lawgiver looking forward to cases which actually
occurred nearly five hundred years after, as demanding a king, and again
looking still farther to cases eight hundred and a thousand years
after--their disobedience and rebellion to God. Now, many will think
that it must have been an easy thing for any people, when swerving from
their law, and especially in that one great fundamental article of
idolatry as the Jews so continually did, and so naturally when the case
is examined, to always have an easy retreat: the plagues and curses
denounced would begin to unfold themselves, and then what more easy than
to relinquish the idolatrous rites or customs, resuming with their old
rituals to God their old privileges? But this was doubly impossible.
First, because men utterly misconceive the matter when they suppose that
with direct consecutive succession the judgment would succeed the
trespass. Large tracts of time would intervene. Else such direct
clockwork as sin and punishment, repentance and relief, would dishonour
God not less than they would trivialize the people. God they would
offend by defeating all His purposes; the people they would render vile
by ripening into mechanic dissimulation. The wrath of God slept often
for a long season; He saw as one who saw not. And by the time that His
large councils had overtaken them, and His judgments were fast coming up
with the offenders, they had so hardened themselves in error that a
whole growth of false desires had sprung up, and of false beliefs, blind
maxims, bad habits, bad connections, and proverbs, which found out a
reconciliation of that irreconcilable truth with the foulest pollutions.
The victims of temptation had become slow even to suspect their own
condition. And, if some more enlightened did so, the road of existence
was no longer easy. Error had woven chains about them. They were
enmeshed. And it is but a faint emblem of their situation to say, that
as well may a man commence a habit of intoxication for the purpose of
having five years' pleasure, and then halting in his career, as the Jews
may contaminate themselves tentatively with idolatrous connections under
the delusion that it would always be time enough for untreading their
steps when these connections had begun to produce evil. For they could
not recover the station from which they swerved. They that had now
realized the _casus foederis_, the case in which they had covenanted
themselves to desist from idolatry, were no longer the men who had made
that covenant. They had changed profoundly and imperceptibly. So that
the very vision of truth was overcast with carnal doubts; the truth
itself had retired to a vast distance and shone but feebly for them, and
the very will was palsied in its motions of recovery.

In such a state, suppose it confirmed and now threatening towards a
total alienation from the truth once delivered, what could avail to save
them? Nothing but affliction in the heaviest form. Vain it was now to
hope for a cheaper restoration, since the very first lightening of their
judicial punishment would seem to them a reason for relapsing, by
seeming to argue that there had been two principles. It was but a false
alarm, they would say, after all. Affliction, therefore, was past all
substitution or remedy. Yet even this case, this prostration to the
ground, had been met for a thousand years by God's servants.


If I have shown that quickening spirit which, diffusing itself through
all thoughts, schemata, possible principles, motives of sensibility, and
forms of taste, has differenced the pre-Christian man from the
post-Christian; if I have detected that secret word which God subtly
introduced into this world, kept in a state of incubation for two
millennia, then with the flames and visible agency of a volcanic
explosion forced into infinite disruption, caused to kindle into a
general fire--that word by which sadness is spread over the face of
things, but also infinite grandeur--then may I rightly lay this as one
chapter of my Emendation of Human Knowledge.


The same thing precisely takes place in literature as in spiritual
things. When a man is entangled and suffocated in business, all relating
to that which shrinks up to a point--and observe, I do not mean that
being conceived as a tent above his head it contracts, but that, viewed
as a body at a distance, it shrinks up to a point, and really vanishes
as a real thing--when this happens, having no subjective existence at
all, but purely and intensely objective, he misconceives it just in the
same way as a poor ignorant man misconceives learning or knowledge;
fancying, _e.g._, like Heylius senior, that he ought to know the road
out of the wood in which they were then entangled.


It is probable that Adam meant only the unity of man as to his nature,
which also is meant by making all men of one blood. Similarly
Boeckh--[Greek: en genei]--which does not mean that Gods _and_ men are
the same, but that of each the separate race has unity in itself. So the
first man, Adam, will mean the earliest race of men, perhaps spread
through thousands of years.


It is a violent case of prejudice, this ordinary appeal of Bossuet,
'Qu'ont gagné les philosophes avec leurs discours pompeux?' (p. 290).
Now how _should_ that case have been tried thoroughly before the
printing of books? Yet it may be said the Gospel _was_ so tried. True,
but without having the power of fully gratifying itself through the
whole range of its capability. That was for a later time, hence a new
proof of its reality.


_An Analogy._--1. I have somewhere read that a wicked set of Jews,
probably, when rebuked for wickedness, replied, 'What! are we not the
peculiar people of God? Strange, then, if we may not have a privilege
more than others to do wrong!' The wretches fancied that to be the
people of God--the chosen people--implied a license to do wrong, and had
a man told them, No, it was just the other way; they were to be better
than others, absolutely, they would have trembled with wrath.

2. Precisely the same idea, I am sure, lurks in many minds as to
repentance. It is odious to think of, this making God the abettor and
encourager of evil; but I am sure it is so, viz., that, because God has
said He will have mercy on the penitent, they fancy that, as the chief
consequence from that doctrine, they may commit sins without anxiety;
though others, not under the Christian privilege, would be called to
account for the same sin, penitent or not penitent. But they--such is
their thought--are encouraged to sin by the assurance that repentance
will always be open to them, and this they may pursue at leisure.

Now, if a man should say: 'But, my friends, this means _real
penitence_;' they would reply, 'Oh, but we mean _real penitence_.'
'Well, if you do, you must know that that is not always possible.' 'Not
possible!' Then make them understand that; they will roar with wrath,
and protest against it as no privilege at all.


The literal interpretation of the Mosaic Cosmogony is the very
expression of a barbarian mind and people, relying so far on magic as to
make all natural process of generation or production impossible, relying
so far on natural processes as to make the fiat of supreme power
evidently inapplicable. It is exactly the Minerva of the Pagans draggled
in her skirts.


_Idolatry._--It is not only a mere blind crotchet of Isaiah's
(Jeremiah's?) to ridicule idols--utterly wide of any real imperfection,
but also it misses all that really might be bad. The true evil is not to
kindle the idea of Apollo by an image or likeness, but to worship
Apollo, _i.e._, a god to be in some sense false--belonging to a system
connected with evil. That may be bad; but there can be no separate evil
in reanimating the idea of this Apollo by a picture.


I have observed many times, but never could understand in any rational
sense, the habit of finding a confirmation of the Bible in mere
archæologic facts occasionally brought to light and tallying with the
Biblical records. As in the Pharaonic and Egyptian usages, and lately in
the case of Nimrod, a great collateral confirmation of Ezekiel has been
fancied. But how? Supposing Ezekiel to have recited accurately the
dimensions of Nineveh, how should _that_ make him a true prophet? Or
supposing him a false one, what motive should that furnish for
mismeasuring Nineveh? The Gospels appear to have been written long after
the events, and when controversies or variations had arisen about them,
they have apparently been modified and shaped to meet those disputes.


_The sun stands still._ I am persuaded that this means no such
incredible miracle as is ordinarily imagined. The interpretation arises
from misconceiving an Oriental expression, and a forcible as well as
natural one. Of all people the Jews could least mistake the nature of
the sun and moon, as though by possibility they could stand in a
relation to a particular valley: that the sun could have stood still in
Gibeon, and the moon in Ajalon. Since they viewed sun and moon as two
great lights, adequated and corresponding to day and night, that alone
shows that they did not mean any objective solstice of the hour, for
else why in Ajalon? Naturally it would be a phenomenon chiefly made
known to the central sanctity of that God whose miraculous interposition
had caused so unknown an arrest of ordinary nature; Jerusalem was not
then known, it was Jebus, a city of Jebusites; and the fact which
subsequently created its sanctity did not occur till more than four
centuries afterwards (viz., on the threshing-floor of Araunah). But
Shiloh existed, and Horeb, and Sinai, and the graves of the Patriarchs.
And all those places would have expounded the reference of the miracle,
would have traced it to the very source of its origin; so as to show not
then only, not to the contemporaries only, but (which would be much more
important) to after generations, who might suspect some mistake in their
ancestors as explaining their meaning, or in themselves as understanding
it. What it really means, I am persuaded, is merely to express that the
day was, of all historical days, the most important. What! do people
never reflect on the [Greek: to] positive of their reading? If they
_did_, they would remember that the very idea of a great cardinal event,
as of the foundation of the Olympiads, was as an arrest, a pausing, of
time; causing you to hang and linger on that time. And the grandeur of
this Jewish Waterloo in which God established possessions for His people
and executed an earthly day of judgment on the ancient polluters
(through perhaps a thousand years) of the sacred land (already sacred as
the abode and burying-place of His first servants under a covenant) was
expressed by saying that the day lingered, arrested itself by a burthen
of glorious revolution so mighty as this great day of overthrow. For
remember this: Would not God have changed Pharaoh's heart, so
intractable, by such a miracle, had it been at all open to His eternal
laws? Whereas, if you say, Aye, but on that account why grant even so
much distinction to the day as your ancestor does? answer, it was the
_final-cause_ day.


The English Church pretends to give away the Bible without note or
comment, or--which, in fact, is the meaning--any impulse or bias to the
reader's mind. The monstrous conceit of the Protestant Churches, viz.,
the right of private judgment (which is, in effect, like the right to
talk nonsense, or the right to criticise Sir John Herschel's books
without mathematics), is thus slavishly honoured. Yet all is deception.
Already in the translation at many hundred points she has laid a
restraining bias on the reader, already by the division of verses,
already by the running abstracts over the Prophets, she has done this.


Can the power adequated to a generation of minds, or to a succession of
many generations, find its comprehension in an individual? Can the might
which overflows the heaven of heavens be confined within a local
residence like that which twice reared itself by its foundations, and
three times by its battlements, above the threshing-floor of
Araunah?[33] Of that mystery, of that local circumscription--in what
sense it was effected, in what sense not effected, we know nothing. But
this by mere human meditation, this profound difficulty we may humanly
understand and measure, viz., the all but impossibility of reaching the
man who stands removed to an extent of fifteen centuries. But here comes
in the unspiritual mind which thinks only of facts--yet mark me so far,
Rome by an augury of wicked gods stretched to a period of 1,200 years.
Yet how open to doubt in one sense! Not, I am sure, in any sense
understood by man, but I doubt not in the ominous sense intended.
Changed in all things essential, she was yet a mighty sceptered potentate
for the world until her dependency on Attila's good-will and
forbearance. 444 after Christ added to 752 B. C. complete the period.
But period for what? For whom? For a great idea that could not be lost.
The conception could not perish if the execution perished. But, next
think of the temptation to _mythus_. And, finally, of God's plan
unrealized, His conceptions unanswered. We should remember that by the
confusion introduced into the economy of internal Divine operations
there is a twofold difficulty placed between the prayer and the
attainment of the prayer. 1st, the deflection, slight though it may seem
to the man, from the state of perfect simplicity and of natural desire;
2ndly, the deflection of the object desired from the parallelism with
the purposes _now_ became necessary to God in order to remedy
_abnormous_ shifting of the centre by man. And again, in the question of
the language of Scripture, I see the same illustration. Sir William
Jones, in a fit of luxurious pleasure-giving, like Gibbons' foolish
fit[34] as to the Archbishop of Carthagena, praises the language of
Scripture as unattainable. I say, No. This is hypocrisy. It is no
dishonour if we say of God that, in the sense meant by Sir William
Jones, it is not possible for Him to speak better than powerful writers
can speak. They have the same language as their instrument, and as
impossible would it be for Apollonius or Sir William Jones to perform a
simple process of addition better than an ordinary keeper of a shop. In
the schemata, because in the original ideas, God says indeed what man
cannot, for these are peculiar to God; but who before myself has shown
what they were? As to mere language, however, and its management, we
have the same identically. And when a language labours under an
infirmity, as all do, not God Himself could surmount it! He is
compromised, coerced, by the elements of language; but what of that? It
is an element of man's creating. And just as in descending on man by His
answers God is defeated or distorted many times by the foul atmosphere
in which man has thrown himself, so in descending upon the mind (unless
by dreams, or some language that he may have kept pure), God is thwarted
and controlled by the imperfections of human language. And, apart from
the ideas, I myself could imitate the Scriptural language--I know its
secret, its principle of movement which lies chiefly in high
abstractions--far better than is done in most parts of the Apocrypha.

The power lies in the spirit--the animating principle; and verily such a
power seems to exist. And the fact derived from the holiness, the
restraints even upon the Almighty's power through His own holiness,
goodness, and wisdom, are so vast that, instead of the unlimited power
which hypocritical glorifiers ascribe to Him by way of lip-honour, in
reaching man _ex-abundantibus_ in so transcendent a way that mere excess
of means would have perplexed a human choice, on the contrary, I am
persuaded that besides the gulf of 1,500 years so as to hold on, so as
to hold hard, and to effect the translation of His will unaltered,
uncorrupted, through the violent assaults of idolatries all round, and
the perverse, headstrong weakness of a naturally unbelieving people,[35]
down to the time of Christ from the time of Moses--there was the labour
hardly to be effected; and why? I have always been astonished at men
treating such a case as a simple _original_ problem as to God. But far
otherwise. It was a problem secondary to a change effected by man. His
rays, His sun, still descended as ever; but when they came near to the
foul atmosphere of man, no ray could pierce unstained, unrefracted, or
even untwisted. It was distorted so as to make it hardly within the
limits of human capacity (observe, the difficulty was in the human power
to receive, to sustain, to comprehend--not in the Divine power to
radiate, to receive what was directed to it). Often I have reflected on
the tremendous gulf of separation placed between man, by his own act,
and all the Divine blessings which could visit him. (This is illustrated
by prayer; for, while we think it odd that so many prayers of good men
for legitimate objects of prayer should seem to be unanswered, we
nevertheless act as to our prayers in a kind of unconscious hypocrisy,
as though to our sense they had been answered in some ineffable way, and
all the while our conduct, to speak strictly, lies outside all this, and
remains wholly uninfluenced by it).

These ideas of God have life only by their own inherent power: yet what
risk that Jews should lapse into supposing themselves separately a
favoured people? By this very error they committed the rebellion against
which they had been warned--in believing that they only were concerned
in receiving a supernatural aid of redemption: thus silently
substituting their own merits for the Divine purposes. All which did in
fact happen. But their errors were overruled, else how could the human
race be concerned in their offences, errors, or ministries? The Jews
forgot what we moderns forget, that they were no separate objects of
favour with God, but only a means of favour.

What occasion to 'argal-bargal' about why God did not sooner accomplish
the scheme of Christianity? For besides that, 1st, possibly the scheme
in its expansion upon earth required a corresponding expansion
elsewhere; 2ndly, it is evident even to our human sense that none but
the most childish eudamonist, whose notion of happiness is that of lazy
luxury, would think of cramming men, bidding them open their mouths, and
at once drugging them with a sensual opium (as all blessing must be
without previous and commensurate elevation to the level of that
blessing); 3rdly, the physical nature of the evil to be undone was such
as would not have _been_ (_objectively_ would not have been, but still
less could it _subjectively_ have been) for the conception of man that
dreadful mystery which it really is, had the awful introversion been
measured back by fewer steps; 4thly, and finally, it seems at first
sight shocking to say of God that He cannot do this and this, but it is
not so. Without adverting to the dark necessities that compass our
chaotic sense when we ascend by continual abstraction to the _absolute_,
without entangling ourselves vainly in those wildernesses that no
created intellect can range or measure--even one sole attribute of God,
His holiness, makes it as impossible for Him to proceed except by
certain steps as it would be impossible for a man, though a free agent,
and apparently master, as he feels and thinks, of his own life, to cut
his throat while in a state of pleasurable health both of mind and
body.

Sir Robert Walpole, as to patriots, was like a man who has originally,
from his nursery up, been thoroughly imbued with the terror of ghosts,
which by education and example afterwards he has been encouraged to
deny. Half he does disbelieve, and, under encouraging circumstances, he
does disbelieve it stoutly. But at every fresh plausible alarm his early
faith intrudes with bitter hatred against a class of appearances that,
after all, he is upon system pledged to hold false. Nothing can be more
ludicrous than his outcry, and his lashing of his own tail to excite his
courage and his wrath and his denial--than his challenge of the lurking
patriots in what he conceives the matter of frauds on the revenue. He
assaults them as if he saw them standing in a row behind the door, and
yet he pummels them for being mere men of the shades--horrible
mockeries. Had there been any truth in their existence, surely, so
strongly as they muster by their own report, some one or other of this
fact should have given me warning--should have exposed the frauds. But
no, all are silent as the grave. But here Sir Robert Walpole is as much
wrong as if, doubting the value or power of Methodist preachers, he
should make it the test of their useful existence that, as often as a
highwayman, a footpad, started out of the wayside, from the other side
should start a Methodist preacher to reason with him and to convert
him.


Are the Whigs less aristocratic than the Tories? Not at all. In tendency
by principle they are the same. The real difference is not in the creed,
in the groundwork, but in certain points of practice and method.


'He took his stand upon the truth'--said by me of Sir Robert Peel--might
seem to argue a lower use of '_the_ truth,' but in fact it is as happens
to the article _the_ itself: you say _the_ guard, speaking of a coach;
_the_ key, speaking of a trunk or watch, _i.e._, _the_ as by usage
appropriated to every coach, watch, trunk. So here the truth, namely, of
the particular perplexity.


The Sepoy mutiny will be best understood if you suppose the Roman
emperors, from Romulus to Augustus, from the Alban Fathers down to the
Ostrogoths--the whole line of a thousand years crowded into two.


Trunkmakers may be great men: they clearly have the upper hand of
authors whom all the world admits to be great men. For the trunkmaker is
the _principal_ in the concern--he makes the trunk, whereas the author,
quite a secondary artist, furnishes only the linings.

_Case of Casuistry._--Wraxall justly notices that errors like Prince
Rupert's from excess of courage, however ruinous, are never resented by
a country. _Ergo_ the inference that prudence would be, always if in
Byng's or Lord St. German's cases, in a matter of doubt held to be bold
fighting; and yet in morals is that an allowable position?

Avaunt, ye hypocrites! who make a whining pretence, according to a fixed
rule, of verbally uttering thanks to God for every chastisement, and who
say this is good for you. So do not I, being upright, and God seeing my
heart, who also sees that I murmur not; but if it were not good in the
end, yet I submit. He is not offended that with upright sincerity I give
no thanks for it. And I say that, unless a man perceives the particular
way in which it has been good for him, he cannot sincerely, truly, or so
as not to mock God with his lips, give thanks simply on an _à priori_
principle, though, of course, he may submit in humbleness.


I do not believe that the faith of any man in the apparent fact that he
will never again see such a person (_i.e._, by being removed by death)
is real. I believe that the degree of faith in this respect is regulated
by an original setting or fixing of our nature quite unconscious to
ourselves. So, again, I believe that hope is never utterly withdrawn,
despair is never absolute. And again, I believe that, at the lowest
nadir, the resource of dying as a means of escape and translation to new
chances and openings is lodged in every man far down below the
sunlights of consciousness. He feels that his death is not final; were
it otherwise he could not rush at the escape so lightly. Indeed, were
his fate fixed immutably, I feel that it would not have been left
possible for him to commit suicide.


_Justice._--You say in the usual spirit of vanity, Y or X has the same
degree of the spirit of justice as V. This is easily said, but the test
is, what will he _do_ for it? Suppose a man to propose rewards
exclusively to those who assisted at a fire, then X and Y, suppose, have
equally seen that many did _not_ assist, even refused to do so. But X
perhaps will shrink from exposing them; V will encounter any hatred for
truth and justice by exposing the undeserving.


It is a foolish thing to say 'Hard words break no bones.' How impossible
to call up from the depths of forgotten times all the unjust or shocking
insinuations, all the scornful refusals to understand one aright, etc.
But surely an injury is nothing to them; for that may be measured, made
sensible, and cannot be forgotten, whereas the other case is like the
dispute, 'Is he wrong as a _poet_?' compared with this, 'Is he wrong as
a _geometrician_?' There need be no anger with the latter dispute; it is
capable of decision.


Then, again, a heart so lacerated is required by Christianity to forgive
the lacerator. Hard it is to do, and imperfectly it is ever done, except
through the unbuckling of human nature under higher inspirations
_working together with time_.


Instead of being any compliment it is the most profound insult, the
idea one can write something rapidly. It is no homage to the writer; it
is villainous insensibility to the written.


Two subjects of stories occur to me. 1. For my Arabian tales, founded on
the story of the Minyas Treasure-House at Orchomenus. 2. Another of an
abbess, who was such by dispensation, but had been married; her
accomplished son succeeds in carrying off a nun. She labours for the
discovery and punishment of the unknown criminal, till she learns who he
is; then parting from him for ever in the early dawn, she, sacrificing
to a love that for her was to produce only hatred and the total
destruction of the total hopes of her ageing life. Splendide Mendax! and
the more angel she.


I find the double effect as the reason of my now reading again with
profit every book, however often read in earlier times, that by and
through my greater knowledge and the more numerous questions growing out
of that knowledge, I have deeper interest, and by and through this
deeper interest I have a value put upon those questions, and I have
other questions supervening through the interest alone. The interest is
incarnated in the wider knowledge; the knowledge is incarnated in the
interest, or at least the curiosity and questions.


Upon trying to imprint upon my memory that at such a period the Argives
ceased to be called Pelasgi, and were henceforward called Danai, I felt
how impracticable (and doubtless in their degree injurious, for though
an infinitesimal injury only as regards any single act doubtless, yet,
_per se_, by tendency doubtless all blank efforts of the memory
unsupported by the understanding are bad), must be any violent efforts
of the memory not falling in with a previous preparedness.


_Music._--I am satisfied that music involves a far greater mystery than
we are aware of. It is that universal language which binds together all
creatures, and binds them by a profounder part of their nature than
anything merely intellectual ever could.


It is remarkable (as proving to me the delibility of caste) that the
Sudras of Central India, during its vast confusions under the Mahrattas
have endeavoured to pass themselves for descendants of the Kshatriyas
(or warrior caste) by assuming the sacred thread, also assumed by the
Rajpoots, and also by some of the Sikhs.


I never see a vast crowd of faces--at theatres, races, reviews--but one
thing makes them sublime to me: the fact that all these people have to
die. Strange it is that this multitude of people, so many of them
intellectually, but also (which is worse) morally, blind, are without
forethought or sense of the realities of life.


Though I love fun, eternal jesting, buffoonery, punning absolutely kills
me. Such things derive all their value from being made to intervene well
with other things.

I have in the course of my misfortunes fasted for thirty years: a
dreadful fate, if it had been to come. But, being past, it is lawful to
regard it with satisfaction, as having, like all fasting and
mortification, sharpened to an excruciating degree my intellectual
faculties. Hence my love and even furor now for mathematics, from which
in my youth I fled.


The _Arrow Ketch_, six guns, is recorded in the _Edinburgh Advertiser_
for June 14th, 1844, as having returned home (to Portsmouth) on
Thursday, June 7th, 'after six years and upwards in commission,' most of
it surveying the Falkland Islands; 'has lost only two men during this
long service, and those from natural causes;' 'never lost a spar, and
has ploughed the ocean for upwards of 100,000 miles.'


Anecdotes from _Edinburgh Advertiser_, for June and May. The dog of a
boy that died paralytic from grief. Little child run over by railway
waggon and horse, clapping its hands when the shadow passed away,
leaving it unhurt. Little girl of six committing suicide from fear of a
stepmother's wrath.


To note the dire reactions (?) of evils: young thieves growing to old
ones, no sewers, damp, famine-engendering, desolating and wasting
plagues or typhus fever, want of granaries or mendacious violence
destroying food, civil feuds coming round in internecine wars, and
general desolations, and, as in Persia, eight millions occupying the
homesteads of three hundred millions. Here, if anywhere, is seen the
almighty reactions through which the cycle of human life, oscillating,
moves.


In the speech of the Lord Provost of Edinburgh (reported on June 14th,
1844), it is recited that boys 'left to stroll about the streets and
closes,' acquire habits so fixed, if not of vice, at least of idleness,
that in consequence of their not being trained to some kind of
discipline in their early years, the habit of vagabondizing acquires
such power that it is uncontrollable. And how apt and forcible was that
quotation in the place assigned it: 'If thou forbear to deliver them
that are drawn unto death, and those that are ready to be slain; if thou
sayest, _Behold, we knew it not_, doth not He that pondereth the heart,
consider it?'--consider it, regard it, make account of it.


_Manners._--The making game of a servant before company--a thing
impossible to well-bred people. Now observe how this is illustrative of
H---- Street.


I confess myself wholly at a loss to comprehend the objections of the
Westminster reviewer and even of my friend Dr. Nichol, to my commentary
on the strange appearance in Orion. The reviewer says that this
appearance (on which he seems to find my language incomprehensible) had
been dispersed by Lord Rosse's telescope. True, or at least so I hear.
But for all this, it was originally created by that telescope. It was
in the interval between the first report and the subsequent reports
from Lord Rosse's telescope that I made my commentary. But in the case
of contradiction between two reports, more accurate report I have not.
As regards the reviewer, there had been no time for this, because the
book, which he reviews, is a simple reprint in America, which he knows I
had had no opportunity of revising. But Dr. Nichol perplexes me. That a
new stage of progress had altered the appearances, as doubtless further
stages will alter them, concerns me nothing, though referring to a
coming republication; for both alike apparently misunderstood the case
as though it required a _real_ phenomenon for its basis. To understand
the matter as it really is, I beg to state this case. Wordsworth in at
least four different places (one being in the fourth book of 'The
Excursion,' three others in Sonnets) describes most impressive
appearances amongst the clouds: a monster, for instance, with a
bell-hanging air, a dragon agape to swallow a golden spear, and various
others of affecting beauty. Would it have been any just rebuke to
Wordsworth if some friend had written to him: 'I regret most sincerely
to say that the dragon and the golden spear had all vanished before nine
o'clock'? So, again, of Hawthorne's face on a rock. The very beauty of
such appearances is in part their evanescence.


To be or _not_ to be. 'Not to be, by G----' said Garrick. This is to be
cited in relation to Pope's--

    'Man never is, but always to be blessed.'


_Political Economy._--Which of these two courses shall I take? 1. Shall
I revise, extend, condense my logic of Political Economy, embodying
every doctrine (and numbering them) which I have amended or
re-positioned, and introduce them thus in a letter to the
Politico-Economical Society: 'Gentlemen, certain ideas fundamental to
Political Economy I presented in a book in the endeavour to effect a
certain purpose. These were too much intermingled with less elementary
ideas in consequence of my defective self-command from a dreadful
nervous idea, and thus by interweaving they were overlapped and lost.
But I am not disposed to submit to that wrong. I affirm steadily that
the foundations of Political Economy are rotten and crazy. I defy, and
taking up my stand as a scholar of Aristotle, I defy all men to gainsay
the following exposures of folly, one or any of them. And when I show
the darkness all round the very base of the hill, all readers may judge
how great is that darkness.' Or, 2. Shall I introduce them as a chapter
in my Logic?

We must never forget, that it is not _impar_ merely, but also _dispar_.
And such is its value in this light, that I protest five hundred kings'
ransoms, nay, any sum conceivable as a common contribution from all
nations would not be too much for the infinite treasure of the Greek
tragic drama alone. Is it superior to our own? No, nor (so far as
capable of collation) not by many degrees approaching to it. And were
the case, therefore, one merely of degrees, there would be no room for
the pleasure I express. But it shows us the ultimatum of the human mind
mutilated and castrated of its infinities, and (what is worse) of its
moral infinities.

You must imagine not only everything which there is dreadful in fact,
but everything which there is mysterious to the imagination in the
pariah condition, before you can approach the Heracleidæ. Yet, even with
this pariah, how poorly do most men conceive it as nothing more than a
civil, a police, an economic affair!


Valckenaer, an admirable Greek scholar, was not a man of fine
understanding; nor, to say the truth, was Porson. Indeed, it is
remarkable how mean, vulgar, and uncapacious has been the range of
intellect in many first-rate Grecians; though, on the other hand, the
reader would deeply deceive himself if he should imagine that Greek is
an attainment other than difficult, laborious, and requiring exemplary
talents. Greek taken singly is, to use an indispensable Latin word,
_instar_, the knowledge of all other languages. But men of the highest
talents have often beggarly understandings. Hence, in the case of
Valckenaer, we must derive the contradictions in his diatribe. He
practises this intolerable artifice; he calls himself [Greek:
philenripideios]; bespeaks an unfair confidence from the reader; he
takes credit for being once disposed to favour and indulge Euripides. In
this way he accredits to the careless reader all the false charges or
baseless concessions which he makes on any question between Euripides
and his rivals. Such men as Valckenaer it is who are biased and
inflected beforehand, without perceiving it, by all the commonplaces of
criticism. These, it is true, do not arise out of mere shadows. Usually
they have a foundation in some fact or modification. What they fail in
is, in the just interpretation of these truths, and in the reading of
their higher relations. 'The Correggiosity of Correggio' was precisely
meant for Valckenaer. The Sophocleity of Sophocles he is keen to
recognise, and the superiority of Sophocles as an artist is undeniable;
nor is it an advantage difficult to detect. On the other hand, to be
more Homeric than Homer is no praise for a tragic poet. It is far more
just, pertinent praise, it is a ground of far more interesting praise,
that Euripides is granted by his undervalues to be the most _tragic_
([Greek: tragichotatos]) of tragic poets. After that he can afford to
let Sophocles be '[Greek: Homerichôtos], who, after all, is not '[Greek:
Homerichôtutos], so long as Æschylus survives. But even so far we are
valuing Euripides as a poet. In another character, as a philosopher, as
a large capacious thinker, as a master of pensive and sorrow-tainted
wisdom, as a large reviewer of human life, he is as much beyond all
rivalship from his scenic brethren as he is below one of them as a
scenic artist.

Is the Nile ancient? So is Homer. Is the Nile remote and hiding its head
in fable? So is Homer. Is the Nile the diffusive benefactor of the
world? So is Homer.

_The Æneid._--It is not any supposed excellence that has embalmed this
poem; but the enshrining of the differential Roman principle (the grand
aspiring character of resolution), all referred to the central principle
of the aggrandizement of Rome.

The sublime of wrath is nowhere exhibited so well as in Juvenal. Yet in
Juvenal pretty glimpses of rural rest--

That is pretty! There is another which comes to my mind and suggests his
rising up and laying aside, etc., and shows it to be an _occasional_
act, and, _ergo_, his garden is but a relaxation, amusement.

Glances which the haughty eyes of Rome threw sometimes gently and
relentingly aside on man or woman, children or the flowers.

Herodotus is as sceptical as Plutarch is credulous. How often is _now_
and _at this time_ applied to the fictitious present of the author,
whilst a man arguing generally beforehand would say that surely a man
could always distinguish between _now_ and _then_.

_Growth of the House of Commons._--The House of Commons was the power of
the purse, and what gave its emphasis to that power? Simply the growing
necessity of standing forces, and the growing increase of war, so that
now out of twenty millions, fifteen are applied to army and navy.

One great evil, as in practice it had begun to show itself, pressed with
equal injustice on the party who suffered from it (viz., the nation),
and the party who seemed to reap its benefit. This was the fact that as
yet no separation had taken place between the royal peculiar revenue,
and that of the nation. The advance of the nation was now (1603, 1st of
James I.) approaching to the point which made the evil oppression, and
yet had not absolutely reached the point at which it could be undeniably
perceived. Much contest and debate divided the stage of incipient evil
from the stage of confessed grievance. In spending £100,000 upon a
single fête, James I. might reasonably allege that he misapplied, at any
rate, his own funds. Wise or not, the act concerned his own private
household. Yet, on the other hand, in the case of money _really_ public,
the confusion of the two expenditures invited and veiled the transfer
of much from national objects that could wait, and were, at any rate,
hidden from effectual scrutiny to the private objects which tempted the
king's profusion. When Mr. Macaulay speaks so often of England sinking
under this or that Stuart to a third-rate power, he is anachronizing.
There was no scale of powers. Want of roads and intercommunication
forbade it. And hence until the Thirty Years' War there was no general
war. Austria, as by fiction the Roman Empire, and always standing
awfully near to North Italy, had a natural relation and gravitation
towards Rome. France, by vainglory and the old literary pretensions of
Anjou, had also a balancing claim upon Italy. Milanese formed indeed (as
Flanders afterwards) the rendezvous for the two powers. Otherwise, only
Austria and Spain (and Spain not till joined to Austria) and France--as
great powers that touched each other in many points--had ever formed a
warlike trio. No quadrille had existed until the great civil war for
life and death between Popery and Protestantism. It was another great
evil that the functions towards which, by inevitable instincts and
tendency of progress, the House of Commons was continually
travelling,--not, I repeat, through any encroaching spirit as the Court
and that House of Commons itself partially fancied,--were not yet
developed: false laws of men, _i.e._, laws framed under theories
misunderstood of rights and constitutional powers, having as much
distorted the true natural play of the organic manifestation and
tendency towards a whole, as ever a dress too tight, or a flower-pot too
narrow, impeded the development of child or plant. Queen Elizabeth,
therefore, always viewed the House of Commons as a disturber of the
public peace, as a mutineer and insurrectionist, when any special
accident threw it upon its natural function; she spoke of State
affairs, and especially of foreign affairs, as beyond their
'_capacity_,' which expression, however, must in charity be interpreted
philosophically as meaning the range of comprehension consistent with
their _total_ means of instruction and preparation, including,
therefore, secret information, knowledge of disposable home resources as
known to the official depositaries of State secrets, etc., and not, as
the modern reader will understand it, simply and exclusively the
intellectual power of appreciation. Since, with all her disposition to
exalt the qualities of princely persons, she could not be so absurdly
haughty as to claim for princes and the counsellors whom interest or
birth had suggested to them a precedency in pure natural endowments.

Charles was a sincere believer but not an earnest believer of the Roman
Catholic faith. James was both sincere and preternaturally earnest.


_The Reformation._--This seems to show two things: 1st, that a deep
searching and 'sagacious-from-afar' spirit of morality can mould itself
under the prompting of Christianity, such as could not have grown up
under Paganism. For it was the abominations in point of morality (_en
fait de moralité?_)--indulgences, the confessional, absolution, the
prevalence of a mere ritual--the usurpation of forms--these it was which
Rome treated violently; and if she draw in her horns for the present,
still upon any occasion offering, upon the cloud of peril passing away,
clearly she would renew her conduct. It was a tendency violently and
inevitably belonging to the Roman polity combined with the Roman
interest, unless, perhaps, as permanently controlled by a
counter-force. 2ndly, the synthesis of this curative force is by
apposition of parts separately hardly conscious of the danger or even of
their own act. For we cannot suppose the vast body of opposition put
forward was so under direct conscious appreciation of the evil and by an
adequate counter-action--doubtless it was by sympathy with others having
better information. These last burned more vividly as the evil was
fiercer. That more vivid sympathy drew increase of supporters.


_Memorandum._--In my historical sketches not to forget the period of
woe, _anterior_ to the Siege of Jerusalem, which Josephus describes as
occurring in all the Grecian cities, but which is so unaccountably
overlooked by historians.

The rule is to speak like the foolish, and think like the wise, and
therefore I agree to call our worthy old mother 'little'--our 'little
island'--as that seems to be the prevailing notion; otherwise I myself
consider Great Britain rather a tall island. A man is not called short
because some few of his countrymen happen to be a trifle taller; and
really I know but of two islands, among tens of thousands counted up by
gazetteers on our planet, that are taller; and I fancy, with such
figures as theirs, they are neither of them likely to think of any
rivalship with our dear old mother. What island, for instance, would
choose to be such a great fat beast as Borneo, as broad as she is long,
with no apology for a waist? Talk of lacing too tight, indeed! I'm sure
Borneo does not injure herself in that way. Now our mother, though she's
old, and has gone through a world of trouble in her time, is as jimp
about the waist as a young lass of seventeen. Look at her on any map of
Europe, and she's quite a picture. It's an old remark that the general
outline of the dear creature exactly resembles a lady sitting. She turns
her back upon the Continent, no doubt, and that's what makes those
foreigneering rascals talk so much of her pride. But she _must_ turn her
back upon somebody, and who is it that should have the benefit of her
countenance, if not those people in the far West that are come of her
own blood? They say she's 'tetyy' also. Well, then, if she is, you let
her alone, good people of the Continent. She'll not meddle with you if
you don't meddle with her. She's kind enough, and, as to her person, I
do maintain that she's quite tall enough, rather thin, it's true, but,
on the whole, a bonny, elegant, dear old fighting mamma.


_Mora Alexandrina._--Note on Middleton's affected sneer. A villa of
Cicero's, where probably the usual sound heard would be the groans of
tormented slaves, had been changed for the cells of Christian monks. Now
mark: what the hound Middleton means is, how shocking to literary
sensibilities that where an elegant master of Latinity had lived, there
should succeed dull, lazy monks, writing (if they wrote at all) in a
barbarous style, and dreaming away their lives in torpor. Now permit me
to pause a little. This is one of those sneers which Paley[38] and
Bishop Butler[39] think so unanswerable, that we must necessarily lie
down and let the sneer ride rough-shod over us all. Let us see, and for
this reason, reader, do not grudge a little delay, especially as you may
'skip' it.

Dr. Conyers ought to have remembered, in the first place, that the villa
could not long remain in the hands of Cicero. Another owner would
succeed, and then the chances would be that the sounds oftenest
ascending in the hour of sunset or in the cool of the dawn would be the
shrieks of slaves under torture. By their own poor miserable fare
contrasted with the splendour reeking around them, these slaves had a
motive, such as our tenderly-treated (often pampered) servants can never
know the strength of, for breaking the seal of any wine cask. From the
anecdote told of his own mother by the wretched Quintus Cicero, the foul
brother of Marcus, it appears that generally there was some
encouragement to do this, on the chance of 'working down' on the master
that the violated seal had been amongst the casks legitimately opened.
For it seems that old Mrs. Cicero's housewifely plan was to seal up all
alike, empty and not empty. Consequently with her no such excuse could
avail. Which proves that often it _did_ avail, since her stratagem is
mentioned as a very notable artifice. What follows? Why, that the slave
was doubly tempted: 1st, by the luxury he witnessed; 2ndly, by the
impunity on which he might calculate. Often he escaped by sheer weight
of metal in lying. Like Chaucer's miller, he swore, when charged with
stealing flour, that it was not so. But this very prospect and
likelihood of escape was often the very snare for tempting to excesses
too flagrant or where secret marks had been fixed. Besides, many other
openings there were, according to the individual circumstances, but this
was a standing one, for tempting the poor unprincipled slave into
trespass that irritated either the master or the mistress. And then came
those periodical lacerations and ascending groans which Seneca mentions
as the best means of telling what o'clock it was in various households,
since the punishments were going on just at that hour.

After, when the gracious revolution of Christianity had taught us, and
by a memento so solemn and imperishable, no longer to pursue our human
wrath, that hour of vesper sanctity had come, which, by the tendency of
the Christian law and according to the degree in which it is observed,
is for us a type and a symbol and a hieroglyphic of wrath extinguished,
of self-conquest, of charity in heaven and on earth.

Now, the monks, it is supposable, might be commonplace drones. Often,
however, they would be far other, transmitters by their copying toils of
those very Ciceronian works which, but for them, would have perished.
And pausing duly here, what sense, what propriety would there be in
calling on the reader to notice with a shock the profanation of
classical ground in such an example as this: 'Mark the strange
revolutions of ages; there, where once the divine Plato's Academus
stood, now rises a huge printing-house chiefly occupied for the last two
years in reprinting Plato's works.' Why, really Plato himself would look
graciously on that revolution, Master Conyers. But next, the dullest of
these monks would hear the Gloria in Excelsis.

Oh, how pitiful it is to hear B---- alleging against Mahomet that he had
done no public miracles. What? Would it, then, alter your opinion of
Mahomet if he _had_ done miracles? What a proof, how full, how perfect!
That Christianity, in spirit, in power, in simplicity, and in truth, had
no more hold over B---- than it had over any Pagan Pontiff in Rome, is
clear to me from that. So, then, the argument against Mahomet is not
that he wants utterly the meekness--wants? wants? No, that he utterly
hates the humility, the love that is stronger than the grave, the purity
that cannot be imagined, the holiness as an ideal for man that cannot be
approached, the peace that passeth all understanding, that power which
out of a little cloud no bigger than a man's hand grows for ever and
ever until it will absorb the world and all that it inherit, that first
of all created the terror of death and the wormy grave; but that first
and last she might triumph over time--not these, it seems by B----, are
the arguments against Mahomet, but that he did not play legerdemain
tricks, that he did not turn a cow into a horse!

In which position B---- is precisely on a level with those Arab Sheikhs,
or perhaps Mamelukes, whom Napoleon so foolishly endeavoured to surprise
by Chinese tricks: 'Aye, all this is very well, but can you make one to
be in Cairo and in Damascus at the same moment?' demanded the poor
brutalized wretches. And so also for B---- it is nothing. Oh, blind of
heart not to perceive that the defect was entirely owing to the age.
Mahomet came to a most sceptical region. There was no semblance or
shadow among the Arabs of that childish credulity which forms the
atmosphere for miracle. On the contrary, they were a hard, fierce
people, and in that sense barbarous; but otherwise they were sceptical,
as is most evident from all that they accomplished, which followed the
foundation of Islamism. Here lies the delusion upon that point. The
Arabs were evidently like all the surrounding nations. They were also
much distinguished among all Oriental peoples for courage. This fact has
been put on record in (1) the East Indies, where all the Arab troops
have proved themselves by far more formidable than twelve times the
number of effeminate Bengalese and Mahrattas, etc. (2) At Aden, where as
rude fighters without the science of war they have been most ugly
customers. (3) In Algeria, where the French, with all advantage of
discipline, science, artillery, have found it a most trying and
exhausting war. Well, as they are now, so they were before Mahomet, and
just then they were ripe for conquest. But they wanted a _combining_
motive and a _justifying_ motive. Mahomet supplied both these. Says he,
'All nations are idolaters; go and thrust them into the mill that they
may be transformed to our likeness.'

Consequently, the great idea of the truth, of a truth transcending all
available rights on the other side, was foreign to Mahometanism, and any
glimmering of this that may seem to be found in it was borrowed, was
filched from Christianity.

The three greatest powers which we know of in moulding human feelings
are, first, Christianity; secondly, the actions of men emblazoned by
history; and, in the third place, poetry. If the first were represented
to the imagination by the atmospheric air investing our planet, which we
take to be the most awful laboratory of powers--mysterious, unseen, and
absolutely infinite--the second might be represented by the winds, and
the third by lightning. Napoleon and Lord Byron have done more mischief
to the moral feelings, to the truth of all moral estimates, to the
grandeur and magnanimity of man, in this present generation, than all
other causes acting together. But how? Simply by throwing human feelings
into false combinations. Both of them linked the mean to the grand, the
base to the noble, in a way which often proves fatally inextricable to
the poor infirm mind of the ordinary spectator. Here is Napoleon, simply
because he wields a vast national machinery, throwing a magic of
celerity and power into a particular action which absolutely overpowers
the _genus attonitorum_, so that they are reconciled by the dazzle of a
splendour not at all _in_ Napoleon, to a baseness which really _is_ in
Napoleon. The man that never praised an enemy is shown to this vile mob
by the light thrown off from the radiant power of France as the greatest
of men; he is confounded with his supporting element, even as the
Jupiter Olympus of Phidias, that never spared a woman in his lust,
seemed the holiest of deities when his rottenness was concealed by ivory
and gold, and his libidinous head was lighted up by sunbeams from above.
Here is Lord Byron connecting, in the portrait of some poor melodramatic
hero possibly, some noble quality of courage or perseverance with scorn
the most puerile and senseless. Prone enough is poor degraded human
nature to find something grand in scorn; but, after this arbitrary
combination of Lord Byron's, never again does the poor man think of
scorn but it suggests to him moral greatness, nor think of greatness but
it suggests scorn as its indispensable condition.


Wordsworth is always recording phenomena as they are enjoyed; Coleridge
as they reconcile themselves with opposing or conflicting phenomena.

W. W.'s social philosophy is surely shallow. It is true the man who has
a shallow philosophy under the guidance of Christianity has a profound
philosophy. But this apart, such truths as 'He who made the creature
will allow for his frailties,' etc., are commonplace.

_Invention as a Characteristic of Poets._--I happened this evening
(Saturday, August 3rd, '44) to be saying of W. W. to myself: 'No poet is
so free from all cases like this, viz., where all the feelings and
spontaneous thoughts which they have accumulated coming to an end, and
yet the case seeming to require more to finish it, or bring it round,
like a peal of church bells, they are forced to invent, and form
descants on raptures never really felt. Suddenly this suggested that
invention, therefore, so far from being a differential quality of
poetry, was, in fact, the polar opposite, spontaneousness being the true
quality.

_Tragedy._--I believe it is a very useful thing to let young persons
cultivate their kind feelings by repeated indulgences. Thus my children
often asked when anything was to be paid or given to any person, that
they might have the satisfaction of giving it. So I see clearly that
young boys or girls allowed to carry abroad their infant brothers and
sisters, when the little creature feels and manifests a real dependence
upon them in every act and movement, which _matre præsente_ they would
not have done, which again seen and felt calls out every latent goodness
of the elder child's heart. So again (here I have clipped out the case).
However, feeding rabbits, but above all the action upon women's hearts
in the enormous expansion given by the relation to their own children,
develops a feeling of tenderness that afterwards sets the model for the
world, and would die away, or freeze, or degenerate, if it were
generally balked. Now just such an action has tragedy, and if the
sympathy with calamities caused to noble natures by ignobler, or by dark
fates, were never opened or moved or called out, it would slumber
inertly, it would rust, and become far less ready to respond upon any
call being made. Such sensibilities are not consciously known to the
possessor until developed.


_Punctuation._--Suppose an ordinary case where the involution of clauses
went three deep, and that each was equally marked off by commas, now I
say that so far from aiding the logic it would require an immense effort
to distribute the relations of logic. But the very purpose and use of
points is to aid the logic. If indeed you could see the points at all in
this relation

then indeed all would be clear, but the six commas will and must be
viewed by every reader unversed in the logical mechanism of sentences as
merely a succession of ictuses, so many minute-guns having no internal
system of correspondence, but merely repeating and reiterating each
other, exactly as in men, guns, horses, timbrels, baggage-waggons,
standards.


_Sheridan's Disputatiousness._--I never heard of any case in the whole
course of my life where disputatiousness was the author of any benefit
to man or beast, excepting always one, in which it became a storm anchor
for poor Sheridan, saving him from sudden shipwreck. This may be found
in Mr. Moore's life, somewhere about the date of 1790, and in chapter
xiii. The book is thirty-seven miles off, which is too far to send for
water, or for scandal, or even for 'extract,' though I'm 'fond of
extract.' Therefore, in default of Mr. Moore's version, I give my own.
The situation was this: Sheridan had been cruising from breakfast to
dinner amongst Jews, Christians, and players (men, women, and
Herveys),[40] and constantly in the same hackney coach, so that the
freight at last settled like the sand-heap of an hour-glass into a
frightful record of costly moments. _Pereunt et imputantur_, say some
impertinent time-pieces, in speaking of the hours. They perish and are
debited to our account. Yes, and what made it worse, the creditor was an
inexorable old Jarvie, who, though himself a creditor, had never heard
the idea of credit. A guinea might be owing, and Sheridan, seldom
remembering his purse, had but a shilling, which even in a court of
Irish law seemed too small a compromise to offer. Black looked the
horizon, stormy the offing, and night was coming on, whilst the port of
consignment was now within thirty minutes' sail. Suddenly a sight of joy
was described. Driving before the wind, on bare poles, was a well-known
friend of Sheridan's, Richardson, famed for various talent, but also for
an invincible headlong necessity of disputing. To pull the check-string,
to take his friend on board, and to rush into fierce polemic
conversation was the work of a moment for Sheridan. He well understood
with this familiar friend how to bring on a hot dispute. In three
minutes it raged, yard-arm to yard-arm. Both grew warm. Sheridan grew
purple with rage. Violently interrupting Richardson, he said: 'And these
are your real sentiments?' Richardson with solemnity and artificial
restraint replied: 'Most solemnly they are.' 'And you stand to them, and
will maintain them?' 'I will,' said Richardson, with menacing solemnity
and even mournfulness. 'I will to my dying day.' 'Then,' said Sheridan
furiously, 'I'm hanged if I'll stay another minute with a man capable of
such abominable opinions!' Bang went the door, out he bounced, and
Richardson, keeping his seat, pursued him with triumphant explosions.
'Ah, wretch! what? you can't bear the truth. You're obliged to hate the
truth. That is why you cut and run before it. Huzza! Mr. Sheridan, M.
P. for Stafford, runs like a hare for fear that he should hear the
truth.' Precisely so, the truth it was that he ran from. The truth at
this particular moment was too painful to his heart. Sheridan had fled;
the awful truth amounted to eighteen shillings.

Yes, virtuous Richardson, you were right; truth it was that he fled
from; truth had just then become too painful to his infirm mind,
although it was useless to tell him so, as by this time he was out of
hearing. 'Yes,' said Richardson meditatively to himself, 'the truth has
at last become insupportable to this unhappy man.' Right, it _had_ so.
And in one minute more it became insupportable even to the virtuous
Richardson, when the coachman revealed the odious extent of the truth,
viz., that the fare now amounted to two-and-twenty shillings.

As I hate everything that the people love, and above all the odious
levity with which they adopt every groundless anecdote, especially where
it happens to be calumnious, I beg not to be supposed a believer in the
common stories current about Sheridan's carelessness of pecuniary
obligations. So far from 'never paying,' which is what public slander
has not ceased to report of him, he was (in Mr. Moore's language)
'_always_ paying;' and for once that he paid too little, a thousand
times he paid a great deal too much. Had, indeed, all his excesses of
payment been gathered into one fund, that fund would have covered his
deficits ten times over. It is, however, true that, whilst he was
continually paying the hundred-pound demands against him, with all their
Jewish accumulations of interest, he was continually unfurnished with
money for his 'menus plaisirs' and trifling personal expenses.

By strong natural tendency of disposition, Sheridan was a man of
peculiarly sensitive honour, and the irregularities into which he fell,
more conspicuously after the destruction of Drury Lane by fire, pained
nobody so much as himself. It is the sense of this fact, and the belief
that Sheridan was never a defaulter through habits of self-indulgence,
which call out in _my_ mind a reaction of indignation at the stories
current against him.


_Bookbinding and Book-Lettering._--Literature is a mean thing enough in
the ordinary way of pursuing it as what the Germans call a
_Brodstudium_; but in its higher relations it is so noble that it is
able to ennoble other things, supposing them in any degree ministerial
to itself. The paper-maker, ergo the rag-maker, ergo the linen
cloth-maker, is the true and original creator of the modern press, as
the Archbishop of Dublin long ago demonstrated. For the art of printing
had never halted for want of the typographic secret; _that_ was always
known, known and practised hundreds of years before the Christian era.
It halted for want of a material cheap enough and plentiful enough to
make types other than a most costly substitute for hand-copying. Do you
hear _that_, gentlemen blockheads, that seldom hear anything but
yourselves? Next after the paper-maker, who furnished the _sine quâ
non_, takes rank, not the engraver or illustrator (our modern novelist
cannot swim without this caricaturing villain as one of his bladders;
all higher forms of literature laugh at him), but the binder; for he, by
raising books into ornamental furniture, has given even to
non-intellectual people by myriads a motive for encouraging literature
and an interest in its extension.

Any specimen of Mr. Ferrar's binding I never saw, but by those who
_have_, it is said to have been magnificent. He and his family were
once, if not twice, visited by Charles I., and they presented to that
prince a most sumptuous Bible of their own binding; which Bible, a lady
once told me, was in that collection gradually formed by George III. at
Buckingham House, and finally presented to the nation by his son. I
should fear it must be in ruins as a specimen of the Little Gidding
workmanship. The man who goes to bed in his coffin dressed in a jewelled
robe and a diamond-hilted sword, is very liable to a visit from the
resurrection-man, who usually disarms and undresses him. The Bible that
has its binding inlaid with gold, sowed with Oriental pearl, and made
horrent with rubies, suggests to many a most unscriptural mode of
searching into its treasures, and too like the Miltonic Mammon's mode of
perusing the gorgeous floors of heaven. Besides that, if the Bible
escaped the Parliamentary War, the true _art_ of the Ferrar family would
be better displayed in a case of less cost and luxury. Certainly, in no
one art was the stupidity of Europe more atrociously recorded than in
this particular art practised by the Ferrars. Boundless was the field
for improvement. And in particular, I had myself drawn from this art, as
practised of old, one striking memorial of that remarkable genius for
stupidity, which in all ages alike seems to haunt man as by an
inspiration, unless he is roused out of it by panic. It is this. Look at
the lettering--that is, the labels lettered with the titles of books--in
all libraries that are not of recent date. No man would believe that the
very earliest attempt to impress a mark of ownership upon some bucket of
the Argonauts, or the rudest scrawl of Polyphemus in forging a tarry
brand upon some sheep which he had stolen, could be _so_ bad, _so_
staggering and illegible, as are these literary inscriptions. How much
better to have had a thin tablet or veneering of marble or iron adjusted
to the back of the book. A stone-cutter in a rural churchyard once told
me that he charged a penny _per_ letter. That may be cheap for a
gravestone, but it seems rather high for a book. _Plato_ would cost you
fivepence, _Aristotle_ would be shocking; and in decency you must put
him into Latin, which would add twopence more to every volume. On a
library like that of Dresden or the Vatican, it would raise a national
debt to letter the books.


_Cause of the Novel's Decline._--No man, it may be safely laid down as a
general rule, can obtain a strong hold over the popular mind without
more or less of real power. A reality there must be. The artifice, the
trickery, cannot arise in this first stage, as by any substitution of a
shadow for a reality. If the mass of readers _feel_ a power, and
acknowledge a power, in that case power there must be. It was the just
remark of Dr. Johnson that men do not deceive themselves in their
amusements. And amusement it is that the great public seek in
literature. The meaner and the more sensual the demands of a man are, so
much the less possible it becomes to cheat him. Seeking for warmth, he
cannot be wrong when he says that he has found it. Asking for _alcohol_,
he will never be cheated with water. His feelings in such a case, his
impressions, instantaneously justify themselves; that is, they bear
witness past all doubting to the certainty of what they report. So far
there is no opening to mistake. The error, the opening to the spurious
on the largest scale, arises first upon the _quality_ of the power.
Strength varies upon an endless scale, not merely by its own gradations,
but by the modes and the degrees in which it combines with other
qualities. And there are many combinations, cases of constant
recurrence, in which some natural vigour, but of no remarkable order,
enters into alliance with animal propensities; where a portentous
success will indicate no corresponding power in the artist, but only an
unusual insensibility to decency and the opinion of thoughtful persons.

Novels are the one sole class of books that ever interest the public,
that reach its heart, or even catch its eye. And the reason why novels
are becoming much more licentious, and much grosser in the arts by which
they court public favour, lies undoubtedly in the quality of that new
reading public which the extension of education has added to the old
one. An education miserably shallow, whilst unavailing for any purpose
of real elevation, lets in upon the theatre of what is called by
courtesy literature a vast additional audience that once would have been
excluded altogether. This audience, changed in no respect from its
former condition of intellect and manners and taste, bringing only the
single qualification of ability to read, is now strong enough in numbers
to impress a new character upon literature in so far as literature has a
motive for applying itself to _their_ wants. The consequences are
showing themselves, and _will_ show themselves more broadly. It is
difficult with proper delicacy to seek illustrations amongst our own
living writers. Illustrations were all too easily found did we care to
enter on the task.

It is true that, during the currency of any year, whilst the quantity
is liable to indeterminate augmentation, ballads will be rather looking
down in the market. But that is a shadow which settles upon every
earthly good thing. No Greek book, for instance, amongst the many that
have perished, would so much rejoice many of us by its resurrection as
the comedies of Menander. Yet, if a correspondent should write word from
Pompeii that twenty-five thousand separate dramas of Menander had been
found in good preservation, adding in a postscript that forty thousand
more had been impounded within the last two hours, and that there was
every prospect of bagging two hundred thousand more before morning, we
should probably petition Government to receive the importing vessels
with chain-shot. Not even Milton or Shakespeare could make head against
such a Lopez de Vega principle of ruinous superfluity. Allowing for this
one case of preternatural excess, assuming only that degree of
limitation which any absolute past must almost always create up to that
point, we say that there is no conceivable composition, or class of
compositions, which will not be welcomed into literature provided, as to
matter, that it shall embody some natural strain of feeling, and
provided, as to manner, that it illustrate the characteristic style of a
known generation.

It might suffice for our present purpose to have once firmly
distinguished between the two modes of literature. But it may be as well
to point out a few corollaries from this distinction, which will serve
at the same time to explain and to confirm it. For instance, first of
all, it has been abundantly insisted on in our modern times, that the
value of every literature lies in its characteristic part; a truth
certainly, but a truth upon which the German chanticleer would not have
crowed and flapped his wings so exultingly, had he perceived the
original and indispensable schism between the literature of knowledge
and the literature of power, because in this latter only can anything
characteristic of a man or of a nation be embodied. The science of no
man can be characteristic, no man can geometrize or chemically analyze
after a manner peculiar to himself. He may be the first to open a new
road, and in that meaning it may be called _his_ road; but _his_ it
cannot be by any such peculiarities as will found an _incommunicable_
excellence. In literature proper, viz., the literature of power, this is
otherwise. There may doubtless have been many imitative poets, wearing
little or nothing of a natural individuality; but of no poet, that ever
_led_ his own class, can it have been possible that he should have been
otherwise than strongly differenced by inimitable features and by traits
not transferable. Consequently the [Greek: to] characteristic, of which
in German cloudland so noisy a proclamation is made as of some
transcendental discovery, is a mere inference from the very idea of a
literature. For we repeat that in blank knowledge a separate peculiarity
marking the individual is not conceivable, whereas in a true literature
reflecting human nature, not as it represents, but as it wills, not as a
passive minor, but as a self-moving power, it is not possible to avoid
the characteristic except only in the degree by which the inspiring
nature happens to be feeble. The exorbitations that differentiate them
may be of narrow compass, but only where the motive power was originally
weak. And agreeably to this remark it may be asserted that in all
literature properly so-called genius, is always manifested, and talent
generally; but in the literature of knowledge it may be doubted very
seriously whether there is any opening for more than talent. Genius may
be defined in the severest manner as _that which is generally
characteristic_; but a thousand times we repeat that one man's mode of
knowing an object cannot differ from another man's. It _cannot_ be
characteristic, and its geniality cannot be externally manifested. To
have said, therefore, of the poetry surviving from ancient Latium, from
Castile, from England, that this is nationally characteristic, and
knowable apart by inalienable differences, is saying no more than
follows out of the very definition by which any and every literature
proper is limited and guarded as a mode of power.

Secondly, even in the exceptions and hesitations upon applying the
rigour of this distinction, we may read the natural recognition (however
latent or unconscious) of the rule itself. No man would think, for
example, of placing a treatise on surveying, on mensuration, on
geological stratifications, in any collection of his national
literature. He would be lunatic to do so. A Birmingham or Glasgow
Directory has an equal title to take its station in the national
literature. But he will hesitate on the same question arising with
regard to a history. Where upon examination the history turns out to be
a mere chronicle, or register of events chronologically arranged, with
no principle of combination pervading it, nor colouring from peculiar
views of policy, nor sympathy with the noble and impassioned in human
action, the decision will be universal and peremptory to cashier it from
the literature. Yet this case, being one of degree, ranges through a
large and doubtful gamut. A history like that of Froissart, or of
Herodotus, where the subjective from the writer blends so powerfully
with the gross objective, where the moral picturesque is so predominant,
together with freshness of sensation which belongs to 'blissful
infancy' in human life, or to a stage of society in correspondence to
it, cannot suffer a demur of jealousy as to its privilege of entering
the select fold of literature. But such advantages are of limited
distribution. And, to say the truth, in its own nature neither history
nor biography, unless treated with peculiar grace, and architecturally
moulded, has any high pretension to rank as an organic limb of
literature. The very noblest history, in much of its substance, is but
by a special indulgence within the privilege of that classification.
Biography stands on the same footing. Of the many memorials dedicated to
the life of Milton, how few are entitled to take their station in the
literature! And why? Not merely that they are disqualified by their
defective execution, but often that they necessarily record what has
become common property.

From my boyish days I had always felt a great perplexity on one point in
Macbeth. It was this: the knocking at the gate, which succeeds to the
murder of Duncan, produced to my feelings an effect for which I never could
account. The effect was, that it reflected back upon the murder a peculiar
awfulness and a depth of solemnity; yet, however obstinately I endeavored
with my understanding to comprehend this, for many years I never could see
_why_ it should produce such an effect.

Here I pause for one moment, to exhort the reader never to pay any
attention to his understanding when it stands in opposition to any
other faculty of his mind. The mere understanding, however useful and
indispensable, is the meanest faculty in the human mind, and the most to
be distrusted; and yet the great majority of people trust to nothing else;
which may do for ordinary life, but not for philosophical purposes. Of this
out of ten thousand instances that I might produce, I will cite one. Ask of
any person whatsoever, who is not previously prepared for the demand by
a knowledge of perspective, to draw in the rudest way the commonest
appearance which depends upon the laws of that science; as for instance, to
represent the effect of two walls standing at right angles to each other,
or the appearance of the houses on each side of a street, as seen by a
person looking down the street from one extremity. Now in all cases, unless
the person has happened to observe in pictures how it is that artists
produce these effects, he will be utterly unable to make the smallest
approximation to it. Yet why? For he has actually seen the effect every day
of his life. The reason is--that he allows his understanding to overrule
his eyes. His understanding, which includes no intuitive knowledge of the
laws of vision, can furnish him with no reason why a line which is known
and can be proved to be a horizontal line, should not _appear_ a horizontal
line; a line that made any angle with the perpendicular less than a right
angle, would seem to him to indicate that his houses were all tumbling down
together. Accordingly he makes the line of his houses a horizontal line,
and fails of course to produce the effect demanded. Here then is one
instance out of many, in which not only the understanding is allowed to
overrule the eyes, but where the understanding is positively allowed to
obliterate the eyes as it were, for not only does the man believe the
evidence of his understanding in opposition to that of his eyes, but,
(what is monstrous!) the idiot is not aware that his eyes ever gave such
evidence. He does not know that he has seen (and therefore _quoad_ his
consciousness has _not_ seen) that which he _has_ seen every day of his
life. But to return from this digression, my understanding could furnish no
reason why the knocking at the gate in Macbeth should produce any effect,
direct or reflected. In fact, my understanding said positively that it
could _not_ produce any effect. But I knew better; I felt that it did; and
I waited and clung to the problem until further knowledge should enable me
to solve it. At length, in 1812, Mr. Williams made his _début_ on the stage
of Ratcliffe Highway, and executed those unparalleled murders which have
procured for him such a brilliant and undying reputation. On which murders,
by the way, I must observe, that in one respect they have had an ill
effect, by making the connoisseur in murder very fastidious in his taste,
and dissatisfied by anything that has been since done in that line. All
other murders look pale by the deep crimson of his; and, as an amateur once
said to me in a querulous tone, "There has been absolutely nothing _doing_
since his time, or nothing that's worth speaking of." But this is wrong;
for it is unreasonable to expect all men to be great artists, and born with
the genius of Mr. Williams. Now it will be remembered that in the first of
these murders, (that of the Marrs,) the same incident (of a knocking at the
door soon after the work of extermination was complete) did actually occur,
which the genius of Shakspeare has invented; and all good judges, and
the most eminent dilettanti, acknowledged the felicity of Shakspeare's
suggestion as soon as it was actually realized. Here, then, was a fresh
proof that I was right in relying on my own feeling in opposition to my
understanding; and I again set myself to study the problem; at length
I solved it to my own satisfaction; and my solution is this. Murder in
ordinary cases, where the sympathy is wholly directed to the case of the
murdered person, is an incident of coarse and vulgar horror; and for this
reason, that it flings the interest exclusively upon the natural but
ignoble instinct by which we cleave to life; an instinct, which, as being
indispensable to the primal law of self-preservation, is the same in kind,
(though different in degree,) amongst all living creatures; this instinct
therefore, because it annihilates all distinctions, and degrades the
greatest of men to the level of "the poor beetle that we tread on,"
exhibits human nature in its most abject and humiliating attitude. Such an
attitude would little suit the purposes of the poet. What then must he
do? He must throw the interest on the murderer. Our sympathy must be with
_him_; (of course I mean a sympathy of comprehension, a sympathy by which
we enter into his feelings, and are made to understand them,--not a
sympathy[1] of pity or approbation.) In the murdered person all strife of
thought, all flux and reflux of passion and of purpose, are crushed by one
overwhelming panic; the fear of instant death smites him "with its petrific
mace." But in the murderer, such a murderer as a poet will condescend to,
there must be raging some great storm of passion,--jealousy, ambition,
vengeance, hatred,--which will create a hell within him; and into this hell
we are to look.

[Footnote 1: It seems almost ludicrous to guard and explain my use of a
word in a situation where it would naturally explain itself. But it has
become necessary to do so, in consequence of the unscholarlike use of the
word sympathy, at present so general, by which, instead of taking it in
its proper sense, as the act of reproducing in our minds the feelings of
another, whether for hatred, indignation, love, pity, or approbation, it
is made a mere synonyme of the word _pity_; and hence, instead of saying
"sympathy _with_ another," many writers adopt the monstrous barbarism of
"sympathy _for_ another."]

In Macbeth, for the sake of gratifying his own enormous and teeming faculty
of creation, Shakspeare has introduced two murderers: and, as usual in his
hands, they are remarkably discriminated: but, though in Macbeth the strife
of mind is greater than in his wife, the tiger spirit not so awake, and his
feelings caught chiefly by contagion from her,--yet, as both were finally
involved in the guilt of murder, the murderous mind of necessity is finally
to be presumed in both. This was to be expressed; and on its own account,
as well as to make it a more proportionable antagonist to the unoffending
nature of their victim, "the gracious Duncan," and adequately to expound
"the deep damnation of his taking off," this was to be expressed with
peculiar energy. We were to be made to feel that the human nature, _i.e._,
the divine nature of love and mercy, spread through the hearts of all
creatures, and seldom utterly withdrawn from man,--was gone, vanished,
extinct; and that the fiendish nature had taken its place. And, as this
effect is marvellously accomplished in the _dialogues_ and _soliloquies_
themselves, so it is finally consummated by the expedient under
consideration; and it is to this that I now solicit the reader's attention.
If the reader has ever witnessed a wife, daughter, or sister, in a fainting
fit, he may chance to have observed that the most affecting moment in
such a spectacle, is _that_ in which a sigh and a stirring announce the
recommencement of suspended life. Or, if the reader has ever been present
in a vast metropolis, on the day when some great national idol was carried
in funeral pomp to his grave, and chancing to walk near the course through
which it passed, has felt powerfully, in the silence and desertion of the
streets and in the stagnation of ordinary business, the deep interest which
at that moment was possessing the heart of man,--if all at once he should
hear the death-like stillness broken up by the sound of wheels rattling
away from the scene, and making known that the transitory vision was
dissolved, he will be aware that at no moment was his sense of the complete
suspension and pause in ordinary human concerns so full and affecting, as
at that moment when the suspension ceases, and the goings-on of human
life are suddenly resumed. All action in any direction is best expounded,
measured, and made apprehensible, by reaction. Now apply this to the case
in Macbeth. Here, as I have said, the retiring of the human heart and the
entrance of the fiendish heart was to be expressed and made sensible.
Another world has stepped in; and the murderers are taken out of the region
of human things, human purposes, human desires. They are transfigured: Lady
Macbeth is "unsexed;" Macbeth has forgot that he was born of woman; both
are conformed to the image of devils; and the world of devils is suddenly
revealed. But how shall this be conveyed and made palpable? In order that a
new world may step in, this world must for a time disappear. The murderers,
and the murder, must be insulated--cut off by an immeasurable gulph
from the ordinary tide and succession of human affairs--locked up and
sequestered in some deep recess; we must be made sensible that the world
of ordinary life is suddenly arrested--laid asleep--tranced--racked into
a dread armistice: time must be annihilated; relation to things without
abolished; and all must pass self-withdrawn into a deep syncope and
suspension of earthly passion. Hence it is, that when the deed is done,
when the work of darkness is perfect, then the world of darkness passes
away like a pageantry in the clouds: the knocking at the gate is heard; and
it makes known audibly that the reaction has commenced: the human has made
its reflux upon the fiendish; the pulses of life are beginning to beat
again; and the re-establishment of the goings-on of the world in which we
live, first makes us profoundly sensible of the awful parenthesis that had
suspended them.

O, mighty poet! Thy works are not as those of other men, simply and merely
great works of art; but are also like the phenomena of nature, like the sun
and the sea, the stars and the flowers,--like frost and snow, rain and dew,
hail-storm and thunder, which are to be studied with entire submission of
our own faculties, and in the perfect faith that in them there can be no
too much or too little, nothing useless or inert--but that, the further
we press in our discoveries, the more we shall see proofs of design and
self-supporting arrangement where the careless eye had seen nothing but
accident!

SIR,--We have all heard of a Society for the Promotion of Vice, of the
Hell-Fire Club, &c. At Brighton, I think it was, that a Society was formed
for the Suppression of Virtue. That society was itself suppressed--but I
am sorry to say that another exists in London, of a character still
more atrocious. In tendency, it may be denominated a Society for the
Encouragement of Murder; but, according to their own delicate [Greek:
euphaemismos], it is styled--The Society of Connoisseurs in Murder. They
profess to be curious in homicide; amateurs and dilettanti in the various
modes of bloodshed; and, in short, Murder-Fanciers. Every fresh atrocity
of that class, which the police annals of Europe bring up, they meet and
criticise as they would a picture, statue, or other work of art. But I
need not trouble myself with any attempt to describe the spirit of their
proceedings, as you will collect _that_ much better from one of the Monthly
Lectures read before the society last year. This has fallen into my hands
accidentally, in spite of all the vigilance exercised to keep their
transactions from the public eye. The publication of it will alarm them;
and my purpose is that it should. For I would much rather put them down
quietly, by an appeal to public opinion through you, than by such an
exposure of names as would follow an appeal to Bow Street; which last
appeal, however, if this should fail, I must positively resort to. For it
is scandalous that such things should go on in a Christian land. Even in a
heathen land, the toleration of murder was felt by a Christian writer to be
the most crying reproach of the public morals. This writer was Lactantius;
and with his words, as singularly applicable to the present occasion, I
shall conclude: "Quid tam horribile," says he, "tam tetrum, quam hominis
trucidatio? Ideo severissimis legibus vita nostra munitur; ideo bella
execrabilia sunt. Invenit tamen consuetudo quatenus homicidium sine bello
ac sine legibus faciat: et hoc sibi voluptas quod scelus vindicavit.
Quod si interesse homicidio sceleris conscientia est,--et eidem facinori
spectator obstrictus est cui et admissor; ergo et in his gladiatorum
cædibus non minus cruore profunditur qui spectat, quam ille qui facit:
nec potest esse immunis à sanguine qui voluit effundi; aut videri non
interfecisse, qui interfectori et favit et proemium postulavit." "Human
life," says he, "is guarded by laws of the uttermost rigor, yet custom has
devised a mode of evading them in behalf of murder; and the demands of
taste (voluptas) are now become the same as those of abandoned guilt." Let
the Society of Gentlemen Amateurs consider this; and let me call their
especial attention to the last sentence, which is so weighty, that I shall
attempt to convey it in English: "Now, if merely to be present at a
murder fastens on a man the character of an accomplice; if barely to be a
spectator involves us in one common guilt with the perpetrator; it follows
of necessity, that, in these murders of the amphitheatre, the hand which
inflicts the fatal blow is not more deeply imbrued in blood than his who
sits and looks on: neither can _he_ be clear of blood who has countenanced
its shedding; nor that man seem other than a participator in murder who
gives his applause to the murderer, and calls for prizes in his behalf."
The "_præmia postulavit_" I have not yet heard charged upon the Gentlemen
Amateurs of London, though undoubtedly their proceedings tend to that;
but the "_interfectori favil_" is implied in the very title of this
association, and expressed in every line of the lecture which I send you.

GENTLEMEN,--I have had the honor to be appointed by your committee to the
trying task of reading the Williams' Lecture on Murder, considered as one
of the Fine Arts; a task which might be easy enough three or four centuries
ago, when the art was little understood, and few great models had been
exhibited; but in this age, when masterpieces of excellence have been
executed by professional men, it must be evident, that in the style
of criticism applied to them, the public will look for something of a
corresponding improvement. Practice and theory must advance _pari passu_.
People begin to see that something more goes to the composition of a fine
murder than two blockheads to kill and be killed--a knife--a purse--and a
dark lane. Design, gentlemen, grouping, light and shade, poetry, sentiment,
are now deemed indispensable to attempts of this nature. Mr. Williams
has exalted the ideal of murder to all of us; and to me, therefore, in
particular, has deepened the arduousness of my task. Like Æschylus or
Milton in poetry, like Michael Angelo in painting, he has carried his art
to a point of colossal sublimity; and, as Mr. Wordsworth observes, has in
a manner "created the taste by which he is to be enjoyed." To sketch the
history of the art, and to examine its principles critically, now remains
as a duty for the connoisseur, and for judges of quite another stamp from
his Majesty's Judges of Assize.

Before I begin, let me say a word or two to certain prigs, who affect to
speak of our society as if it were in some degree immoral in its tendency.
Immoral! God bless my soul, gentlemen, what is it that people mean? I am
for morality, and always shall be, and for virtue and all that; and I do
affirm, and always shall, (let what will come of it,) that murder is an
improper line of conduct, highly improper; and I do not stick to assert,
that any man who deals in murder, must have very incorrect ways of
thinking, and truly inaccurate principles; and so far from aiding and
abetting him by pointing out his victim's hiding-place, as a great
moralist of Germany declared it to be every good man's duty to do, I
would subscribe one shilling and sixpense to have him apprehended, which is
more by eighteen-pence than the most eminent moralists have subscribed for
that purpose. But what then? Everything in this world has two handles.
Murder, for instance, may be laid hold of by its moral handle, (as it
generally is in the pulpit, and at the Old Bailey;) and _that_, I confess,
is its weak side; or it may also be treated _æsthetically_, as the Germans
call it, that is, in relation to good taste.

[Footnote 1: Kant--who carried his demands of unconditional veracity to so
extravagant a length as to affirm, that, if a man were to see an innocent
person escape from a murderer, it would be his duty, on being questioned
by the murderer, to tell the truth, and to point out the retreat of the
innocent person, under any certainty of causing murder. Lest this doctrine
should be supposed to have escaped him in any heat of dispute, on being
taxed with it by a celebrated French writer, he solemnly reaffirmed it,
with his reasons.]

To illustrate this, I will urge the authority of three eminent persons,
viz., S.T. Coleridge, Aristotle, and Mr. Howship the surgeon. To begin with
S.T.C. One night, many years ago, I was drinking tea with him in Berners'
Street, (which, by the way, for a short street, has been uncommonly
fruitful in men of genius.) Others were there besides myself; and amidst
some carnal considerations of tea and toast, we were all imbibing a
dissertation on Plotinus from the attic lips of S.T.C. Suddenly a cry arose
of "_Fire--fire_!" upon which all of us, master and disciples, Plato and
[Greek: hoi peri ton Platona], rushed out, eager for the spectacle. The
fire was in Oxford Street, at a piano-forte maker's; and, as it promised to
be a conflagration of merit, I was sorry that my engagements forced me away
from Mr. Coleridge's party before matters were come to a crisis. Some days
after, meeting with my Platonic host, I reminded him of the case, and
begged to know how that very promising exhibition had terminated. "Oh,
sir," said he, "it turned out so ill, that we damned it unanimously." Now,
does any man suppose that Mr. Coleridge,--who, for all he is too fat to be
a person of active virtue, is undoubtedly a worthy Christian,--that this
good S. T. C., I say, was an incendiary, or capable of wishing any ill
to the poor man and his piano-fortes (many of them, doubtless, with the
additional keys)? On the contrary, I know him to be that sort of man, that
I durst stake my life upon it he would have worked an engine in a case of
necessity, although rather of the fattest for such fiery trials of his
virtue. But how stood the case? Virtue was in no request. On the arrival
of the fire-engines, morality had devolved wholly on the insurance office.
This being the case, he had a right to gratify his taste. He had left his
tea. Was he to have nothing in return?

I contend that the most virtuous man, under the premises stated, was
entitled to make a luxury of the fire, and to hiss it, as he would any
other performance that raised expectations in the public mind, which
afterwards it disappointed. Again, to cite another great authority,
what says the Stagyrite? He (in the Fifth Book, I think it is, of his
Metaphysics) describes what he calls [Greek: kleptaen teleion], i.e., _a
perfect thief_; and, as to Mr. Howship, in a work of his on Indigestion, he
makes no scruple to talk with admiration of a certain ulcer which he had
seen, and which he styles "a beautiful ulcer." Now will any man pretend,
that, abstractedly considered, a thief could appear to Aristotle a perfect
character, or that Mr. Howship could be enamored of an ulcer? Aristotle,
it is well known, was himself so very moral a character, that, not content
with writing his Nichomachean Ethics, in one volume octavo, he also
wrote another system, called _Magna Moralia_, or Big Ethics. Now, it is
impossible that a man who composes any ethics at all, big or little, should
admire a thief _per se_, and, as to Mr. Howship, it is well known that he
makes war upon all ulcers; and, without suffering himself to be seduced by
their charms, endeavors to banish them from the county of Middlesex. But
the truth is, that, however objectionable _per se_, yet, relatively to
others of their class, both a thief and an ulcer may have infinite degrees
of merit. They are both imperfections, it is true; but to be imperfect
being their essence, the very greatness of their imperfection becomes their
perfection. _Spartam nactus es, hunc exorna_. A thief like Autolycus or
Mr. Barrington, and a grim phagedænic ulcer, superbly defined, and running
regularly through all its natural stages, may no less justly be regarded
as ideals after _their_ kind, than the most faultless moss-rose amongst
flowers, in its progress from bud to "bright consummate flower;" or,
amongst human flowers, the most magnificent young female, apparelled in
the pomp of womanhood. And thus not only the ideal of an inkstand may be
imagined, (as Mr. Coleridge demonstrated in his celebrated correspondence
with Mr. Blackwood,) in which, by the way, there is not so much, because an
inkstand is a laudable sort of thing, and a valuable member of society; but
even imperfection itself may have its ideal or perfect state.

Really, gentlemen, I beg pardon for so much philosophy at one time, and now
let me apply it. When a murder is in the paulo-post-futurum tense, and a
rumor of it comes to our ears, by all means let us treat it morally. But
suppose it over and done, and that you can say of it,[Greek: Tetelesai],
or (in that adamantine molossus of Medea) [Greek: eirzasai]; suppose the
poor murdered man to be out of his pain, and the rascal that did it off
like a shot, nobody knows whither; suppose, lastly, that we have done our
best, by putting out our legs to trip up the fellow in his flight, but all
to no purpose--"abiit, evasit," &c.--why, then, I say, what's the use of
any more virtue? Enough has been given to morality; now comes the turn of
Taste and the Fine Arts. A sad thing it was, no doubt, very sad; but _we_
can't mend it. Therefore let us make the best of a bad matter; and, as it
is impossible to hammer anything out of it for moral purposes, let us treat
it æsthetically, and see if it will turn to account in that way. Such is
the logic of a sensible man, and what follows? We dry up our tears, and
have the satisfaction, perhaps, to discover that a transaction, which,
morally considered, was shocking, and without a leg to stand upon,
when tried by principles of Taste, turns out to be a very meritorious
performance. Thus all the world is pleased; the old proverb is justified,
that it is an ill wind which blows nobody good; the amateur, from looking
bilious and sulky, by too close an attention to virtue, begins to pick up
his crumbs, and general hilarity prevails. Virtue has had her day; and
henceforward, _Vertu_ and Connoisseurship have leave to provide for
themselves. Upon this principle, gentlemen, I propose to guide your
studies, from Cain to Mr. Thurtell. Through this great gallery of murder,
therefore, together let us wander hand in hand, in delighted admiration,
while I endeavor to point your attention to the objects of profitable
criticism.

The first murder is familiar to you all. As the inventor of murder, and the
father of the art, Cain must have been a man of first-rate genius. All the
Cains were men of genius. Tubal Cain invented tubes, I think, or some such
thing. But, whatever were the originality and genius of the artist, every
art was then in its infancy, and the works must be criticised with a
recollection of that fact. Even Tubal's work would probably be little
approved at this day in Sheffield; and therefore of Cain (Cain senior, I
mean,) it is no disparagement to say, that his performance was but so so.
Milton, however, is supposed to have thought differently. By his way of
relating the case, it should seem to have been rather a pet murder with
him, for he retouches it with an apparent anxiety for its picturesque
effect:

  Whereat he inly raged; and, as they talk'd,
  Smote him into the midriff with a stone
  That beat out life: he fell; and, deadly pale,
  Groan'd out his soul _with gushing blood effus'd_.
  _Par. Lost, B. XI_.

Upon this, Richardson, the painter, who had an eye for effect, remarks as
follows, in his Notes on Paradise Lost, p. 497: "It has been thought,"
says he, "that Cain beat (as the common saying is) the breath out of his
brother's body with a great stone; Milton gives in to this, with the
addition, however, of a large wound." In this place it was a judicious
addition; for the rudeness of the weapon, unless raised and enriched by
a warm, sanguinary coloring, has too much of the naked air of the savage
school; as if the deed were perpetrated by a Polypheme without science,
premeditation, or anything but a mutton bone. However, I am chiefly pleased
with the improvement, as it implies that Milton was an amateur. As to
Shakspeare, there never was a better; as his description of the murdered
Duke of Gloucester, in Henry VI., of Duncan's, Banquo's, &c., sufficiently
proves.

The foundation of the art having been once laid, it is pitiable to see how
it slumbered without improvement for ages. In fact, I shall now be obliged
to leap over all murders, sacred and profane, as utterly unworthy of
notice, until long after the Christian era. Greece, even in the age of
Pericles, produced no murder of the slightest merit; and Rome had too
little originality of genius in any of the arts to succeed, where her
model failed her. In fact, the Latin language sinks under the very idea of
murder. "The man was murdered;"--how will this sound in Latin? _Interfectus
est, interemptus est_--which simply expresses a homicide; and hence the
Christian Latinity of the middle ages was obliged to introduce a new word,
such as the feebleness of classic conceptions never ascended to. _Murdratus
est_, says the sublimer dialect of Gothic ages. Meantime, the Jewish,
school of murder kept alive whatever was yet known in the art, and
gradually transferred it to the Western World. Indeed the Jewish school was
always respectable, even in the dark ages, as the case of Hugh of Lincoln
shows, which was honored with the approbation of Chaucer, on occasion of
another performance from the same school, which he puts into the mouth of
the Lady Abbess.

Recurring, however, for one moment to classical antiquity, I cannot but
think that Catiline, Clodius, and some of that coterie, would have made
first-rate artists; and it is on all accounts to be regretted, that the
priggism of Cicero robbed his country of the only chance she had for
distinction in this line. As the _subject_ of a murder, no person could
have answered better than himself. Lord! how he would have howled with
panic, if he had heard Cethegus under his bed. It would have been truly
diverting to have listened to him; and satisfied I am, gentlemen, that he
would have preferred the _utile_ of creeping into a closet, or even into a
_cloaca_, to the _honestum_ of facing the bold artist.

To come now to the dark ages--(by which we, that speak with precision,
mean, _par excellence_, the tenth century, and the times immediately before
and after)--these ages ought naturally to be favorable to the art of
murder, as they were to church architecture, to stained glass, &c.; and,
accordingly, about the latter end of this period, there arose a great
character in our art, I mean the Old Man of the Mountains. He was a shining
light, indeed, and I need not tell you, that the very word "assassin" is
deduced from him. So keen an amateur was he, that on one occasion, when his
own life was attempted by a favorite assassin, he was so much pleased
with the talent shown, that notwithstanding the failure of the artist, he
created him a duke upon the spot, with remainder to the female line, and
settled a pension on him for three lives. Assassination is a branch of the
art which demands a separate notice; and I shall devote an entire lecture
to it. Meantime, I shall only observe how odd it is, that this branch of
the art has flourished by fits. It never rains, but it pours. Our own age
can boast of some fine specimens; and, about two centuries ago, there was a
most brilliant constellation of murders in this class. I need hardly say,
that I allude especially to those five splendid works,--the assassinations
of William I, of Orange, of Henry IV., of France, of the Duke of
Buckingham, (which you will find excellently described in the letters
published by Mr. Ellis, of the British Museum,) of Gustavus Adolphus, and
of Wallenstein. The King of Sweden's assassination, by the by, is doubted
by many writers, Harte amongst others; but they are wrong. He was murdered;
and I consider his murder unique in its excellence; for he was murdered at
noon-day, and on the field of battle,--a feature of original conception,
which occurs in no other work of art that I remember. Indeed, all of these
assassinations may be studied with profit by the advanced connoisseur. They
are all of them _exemplaria_, of which one may say,--

In these assassinations of princes and statesmen, there is nothing to
excite our wonder; important changes often depend on their deaths; and,
from the eminence on which they stand, they are peculiarly exposed to the
aim of every artist who happens to be possessed by the craving for scenical
effect. But there is another class of assassinations, which has prevailed
from an early period of the seventeenth century, that really _does_
surprise me; I mean the assassination of philosophers. For, gentlemen, it
is a fact, that every philosopher of eminence for the two last centuries
has either been murdered, or, at the least, been very near it; insomuch,
that if a man calls himself a philosopher, and never had his life
attempted, rest assured there is nothing in him; and against Locke's
philosophy in particular, I think it an unanswerable objection (if we
needed any), that, although he carried his throat about with him in this
world for seventy-two years, no man ever condescended to cut it. As these
cases of philosophers are not much known, and are generally good and well
composed in their circumstances, I shall here read an excursus on that
subject, chiefly by way of showing my own learning.

The first great philosopher of the seventeenth century (if we except
Galileo) was Des Cartes; and if ever one could say of a man that he was all
_but_ murdered--murdered within an inch--one must say it of him. The case
was this, as reported by Baillet in his _Vie De M. Des Cartes_, tom. I. p.
102-3. In the year 1621, when Des Cartes might be about twenty-six years
old, he was touring about as usual, (for he was as restless as a hyæna,)
and, coming to the Elbe, either at Gluckstadt or at Hamburgh, he took
shipping for East Friezland: what he could want in East Friezland no man
has ever discovered; and perhaps he took this into consideration himself;
for, on reaching Embden, he resolved to sail instantly for _West_
Friezland; and being very impatient of delay, he hired a bark, with a few
mariners to navigate it. No sooner had he got out to sea than he made a
pleasing discovery, viz. that he had shut himself up in a den of murderers.
His crew, says M. Baillet, he soon found out to be "des scélérats,"--not
_amateurs_, gentlemen, as we are, but professional men--the height of
whose ambition at that moment was to cut his throat. But the story is too
pleasing to be abridged; I shall give it, therefore, accurately, from the
French of his biographer: "M. Des Cartes had no company but that of his
servant, with whom he was conversing in French. The sailors, who took him
for a foreign merchant, rather than a cavalier, concluded that he must
have money about him. Accordingly they came to a resolution by no means
advantageous to his purse. There is this difference, however, between
sea-robbers and the robbers in forests, that the latter may, without
hazard, spare the lives of their victims; whereas the other cannot put
a passenger on shore in such a case without running the risk of being
apprehended. The crew of M. Des Cartes arranged their measures with a view
to evade any danger of that sort. They observed that he was a stranger from
a distance, without acquaintance in the country, and that nobody would take
any trouble to inquire about him, in case he should never come to hand,
(_quand il viendroit à manquer_.") Think, gentlemen, of these Friezland
dogs discussing a philosopher as if he were a puncheon of rum. "His temper,
they remarked, was very mild and patient; and, judging from the gentleness
of his deportment, and the courtesy with which he treated themselves, that
he could be nothing more than some green young man, they concluded that
they should have all the easier task in disposing of his life. They made no
scruple to discuss the whole matter in his presence, as not supposing that
he understood any other language than that in which he conversed with his
servant; and the amount of their deliberation was--to murder him, then to
throw him into the sea, and to divide his spoils."

Excuse my laughing, gentlemen, but the fact is, I always _do_ laugh when I
think of this case--two things about it seem so droll. One, is, the horrid
panic or "funk," (as the men of Eton call it,) in which Des Cartes must
have found himself upon hearing this regular drama sketched for his own
death--funeral--succession and administration to his effects. But another
thing, which seems to me still more funny about this affair is, that
if these Friezland hounds had been "game," we should have no Cartesian
philosophy; and how we could have done without _that_, considering the
worlds of books it has produced, I leave to any respectable trunk-maker to
declare.

However, to go on; spite of his enormous funk, Des Cartes showed fight,
and by that means awed these Anti-Cartesian rascals. "Finding," says M.
Baillet, "that the matter was no joke, M. Des Cartes leaped upon his feet
in a trice, assumed a stern countenance that these cravens had never looked
for, and addressing them in their own language, threatened to run them
through on the spot if they dared to offer him any insult." Certainly,
gentlemen, this would have been an honor far above the merits of such
inconsiderable rascals--to be spitted like larks upon a Cartesian sword;
and therefore I am glad M. Des Cartes did not rob the gallows by executing
his threat, especially as he could not possibly have brought his vessel to
port, after he had murdered his crew; so that he must have continued to
cruise for ever in the Zuyder Zee, and would probably have been mistaken by
sailors for the _Flying Dutchman_, homeward bound. "The spirit which M. Des
Cartes manifested," says his biographer, "had the effect of magic on these
wretches. The suddenness of their consternation struck their minds with a
confusion which blinded them to their advantage, and they conveyed him to
his destination as peaceably as he could desire."

Possibly, gentlemen, you may fancy that, on the model of Cæsar's address
to his poor ferryman,--"_Cæsarem vehis et fortunas ejus_"--M. Des Cartes
needed only to have said,--"Dogs, you cannot cut my throat, for you carry
Des Cartes and his philosophy," and might safely have defied them to do
their worst. A German emperor had the same notion, when, being cautioned to
keep out of the way of a cannonading, he replied, "Tut! man. Did you ever
hear of a cannon-ball that killed an emperor?" As to an emperor I cannot
say, but a less thing has sufficed to smash a philosoper; and the next
great philosopher of Europe undoubtedly _was_ murdered. This was Spinosa.

I know very well the common opinion about him is, that he died in his bed.
Perhaps he did, but he was murdered for all that; and this I shall prove
by a book published at Brussels, in the year 1731, entitled, _La Via de
Spinosa; Par M. Jean Colerus_, with many additions, from a MS. life, by one
of his friends. Spinosa died on the 21st February, 1677, being then little
more than forty-four years old. This of itself looks suspicious; and M.
Jean admits, that a certain expression in the MS. life of him would warrant
the conclusion, "que sa mort n'a pas été tout-à-fait naturelle." Living in
a damp country, and a sailor's country, like Holland, he may be thought to
have indulged a good deal in grog, especially in punch, which was then
newly discovered. Undoubtedly he might have done so; but the fact is that
he did not. M. Jean calls him "extrêmement sobre en son boire et en son
manger." And though some wild stories were afloat about his using the juice
of mandragora (p. 140,) and opium, (p. 144,) yet neither of these articles
appeared in his druggist's bill. Living, therefore, with such sobriety, how
was it possible that he should die a natural death at forty-four? Hear his
biographer's account:--"Sunday morning the 21st of February, before it was
church time, Spinosa came down stairs and conversed with the master and
mistress of the house." At this time, therefore, perhaps ten o'clock on
Sunday morning, you see that Spinosa was alive, and pretty well. But it
seems "he had summoned from Amsterdam a certain physician, whom," says the
biographer, "I shall not otherwise point out to notice than by these two
letters, L.M. This L.M. had directed the people of the house to purchase an
ancient cock, and to have him boiled forthwith, in order that Spinosa might
take some broth about noon, which in fact he did, and ate some of the _old
cock_ with a good appetite, after the landlord and his wife had returned
from church.

"In the afternoon, L.M. staid alone with Spinosa, the people of the house
having returned to church; on coming out from which they learnt, with much
surprise, that Spinosa had died about three o'clock, in the presence
of L.M., who took his departure for Amsterdam the same evening, by the
night-boat, without paying the least attention to the deceased. No doubt he
was the readier to dispense with these duties, as he had possessed himself
of a ducatoon and a small quantity of silver, together with a silver-hafted
knife, and had absconded with his pillage." Here you see, gentlemen, the
murder is plain, and the manner of it. It was L.M. who murdered Spinosa
for his money. Poor S. was an invalid, meagre, and weak: as no blood
was observed, L.M., no doubt, threw him down and smothered him with
pillows,--the poor man being already half suffocated by his infernal
dinner. But who was L.M.? It surely never could be Lindley Murray; for I
saw him at York in 1825; and besides, I do not think he Would do such a
thing; at least, not to a brother grammarian: for you know, gentlemen, that
Spinosa wrote a very respectable Hebrew grammar.

Hobbes, but why, or on what principle, I never could understand, was not
murdered. This was a capital oversight of the professional men in the
seventeenth century; because in every light he was a fine subject for
murder, except, indeed, that he was lean and skinny; for I can prove that
he had money, and (what is very funny,) he had no right to make the least
resistance; for, according to himself, irresistible power creates the very
highest species of right, so that it is rebellion of the blackest die
to refuse to be murdered, when a competent force appears to murder you.
However, gentlemen, though he was not murdered, I am happy to assure you
that (by his own account) he was three times very near being murdered. The
first time was in the spring of 1640, when he pretends to have circulated
a little MS. on the king's behalf, against the Parliament; he never could
produce this MS., by the by; but he says that, "Had not his Majesty
dissolved the Parliament," (in May,) "it had brought him into danger of his
life." Dissolving the Parliament, however, was of no use; for, in November
of the same year, the Long Parliament assembled, and Hobbes, a second time,
fearing he should be murdered, ran away to France. This looks like the
madness of John Dennis, who thought that Louis XIV. would never make peace
with Queen Anne, unless he were given up to his vengeance; and actually ran
away from the sea-coast in that belief. In France, Hobbes managed to take
care of his throat pretty well for ten years; but at the end of that time,
by way of paying court to Cromwell, he published his Leviathan. The old
coward now began to "funk" horribly for the third time; he fancied the
swords of the cavaliers were constantly at his throat, recollecting how
they had served the Parliament ambassadors at the Hague and Madrid. "Turn,"
says he, in his dog-Latin life of himself,

  "Tum venit in mentem mihi Dorislaus et Ascham;
  Tanquam proscripto terror ubique aderat."

And accordingly he ran home to England. Now, certainly, it is very true
that a man deserved a cudgelling for writing Leviathan; and two or three
cudgellings for writing a pentameter ending so villanously as--"terror
ubique aderat!" But no man ever thought him worthy of anything beyond
cudgelling. And, in fact, the whole story is a bounce of his own. For, in a
most abusive letter which he wrote "to a learned person," (meaning Wallis
the mathematician,) he gives quite another account of the matter, and says
(p. 8,) he ran home "because he would not trust his safety with the French
clergy;" insinuating that he was likely to be murdered for his religion,
which would have been a high joke indeed--Tom's being brought to the stake
for religion.

Bounce or not bounce, however, certain it is, that Hobbes, to the end of
his life, feared that somebody would murder him. This is proved by the
story I am going to tell you: it is not from a manuscript, but, (as Mr.
Coleridge says,) it is as good as manuscript; for it comes from a book
now entirely forgotten, viz., "The Creed of Mr. Hobbes Examined; in a
Conference between him and a Student in Divinity," (published about ten
years before Hobbes's death.) The book is anonymous, but it was written by
Tennison, the same who, about thirty years after, succeeded Tillotson as
Archbishop of Canterbury. The introductory anecdote is as follows: "A
certain divine, it seems, (no doubt Tennison himself,) took an annual tour
of one month to different parts of the island. In one of these excursions
(1670) he visited the Peak in Derbyshire, partly in consequence of Hobbes's
description of it. Being in that neighborhood, he could not but pay a visit
to Buxton; and at the very moment of his arrival, he was fortunate enough
to find a party of gentlemen dismounting at the inn door, amongst whom was
a long thin fellow, who turned out to be no less a person than Mr. Hobbes,
who probably had ridden over from Chattsworth. Meeting so great a lion,--a
tourist, in search of the picturesque, could do no less than present
himself in the character of bore. And luckily for this scheme, two of Mr.
Hobbes's companions were suddenly summoned away by express; so that, for
the rest of his stay at Buxton, he had Leviathan entirely to himself, and
had the honor of bowsing with him in the evening. Hobbes, it seems, at
first showed a good deal of stiffness, for he was shy of divines; but this
wore off, and he became very sociable and funny, and they agreed to go into
the bath together. How Tennison could venture to gambol in the same water
with Leviathan, I cannot explain; but so it was: they frolicked about like
two dolphins, though Hobbes must have been as old as the hills; and
"in those intervals wherein they abstained from swimming and plunging
themselves," [i.e., diving,] "they discoursed of many things relating to
the Baths of the Ancients, and the Origine of Springs. When they had in
this manner passed away an hour, they stepped out of the bath; and, having
dried and cloathed themselves, they sate down in expectation of such a
supper as the place afforded; designing to refresh themselves like the
_Deipnosophilæ_, and rather to reason than to drink profoundly. But in this
innocent intention they were interrupted by the disturbance arising from a
little quarrel, in which some of the ruder people in the house were for a
short time engaged. At this Mr. Hobbes seemed much concerned, though he was
at some distance from the persons." And why was he concerned, gentlemen?
No doubt you fancy, from, some benign and disinterested love of peace and
harmony, worthy of an old man and a philosopher. But listen--"For a while
he was not composed, but related it once or twice as to himself, with a
low and careful tone, how Sextus Roscius was murthered after supper by
the Balneæ Palatinæ. Of such general extent is that remark of Cicero, in
relation to Epicurus the Atheist, of whom he observed that he of all men
dreaded most those things which he contemned--Death and the Gods." Merely
because it was supper time, and in the neighborhood of a bath, Mr. Hobbes
must have the fate of Sextus Roscius. What logic was there in this, unless
to a man who was always dreaming of murder? Here was Leviathan, no
longer afraid of the daggers of English cavaliers or French clergy, but
"frightened from his propriety" by a row in an ale-house between some
honest clod-hoppers of Derbyshire, whom his own gaunt scare-crow of a
person that belonged to quite another century, would have frightened out of
their wits.

Malebranche, it will give you pleasure to hear, was murdered. The man who
murdered him is well known: it was Bishop Berkeley. The story is familiar,
though hitherto not put in a proper light. Berkeley, when a young man, went
to Paris and called on Père Malebranche. He found him in his cell cooking.
Cooks have ever been a _genus irritabile_; authors still more so:
Malebranche was both: a dispute arose; the old father, warm already, became
warmer; culinary and metaphysical irritations united to derange his liver:
he took to his bed, and died. Such is the common version of the story:
"So the whole ear of Denmark is abused." The fact is, that the matter was
hushed up, out of consideration for Berkeley, who (as Pope remarked) had
"every virtue under heaven:" else it was well known that Berkeley, feeling
himself nettled by the waspishness of the old Frenchman, squared at him; a
_turn-up_ was the consequence: Malebranche was floored in the first round;
the conceit was wholly taken out of him; and he would perhaps have given
in; but Berkeley's blood was now up, and he insisted on the old Frenchman's
retracting his doctrine of Occasional Causes. The vanity of the man was too
great for this; and he fell a sacrifice to the impetuosity of Irish youth,
combined with his own absurd obstinacy.

Leibnitz, being every way superior to Malebranche, one might, _a fortiori_,
have counted on _his_ being murdered; which, however, was not the case. I
believe he was nettled at this neglect, and felt himself insulted by the
security in which he passed his days. In no other way can I explain
his conduct at the latter end of his life, when he chose to grow very
avaricious, and to hoard up large sums of gold, which he kept in his
own house. This was at Vienna, where he died; and letters are still in
existence, describing the immeasurable anxiety which he entertained for his
throat. Still his ambition, for being _attempted_ at least, was so
great, that he would not forego the danger. A late English pedagogue, of
Birmingham manufacture, viz., Dr. Parr, took a more selfish course, under
the same circumstances. He had amassed a considerable quantity of gold and
silver plate, which was for some time deposited in his bed-room at his
parsonage house, Hatton. But growing every day more afraid of being
murdered, which he knew that he could not stand, (and to which, indeed, he
never had the slightest pretension,) he transferred the whole to the Hatton
blacksmith; conceiving, no doubt, that the murder of a blacksmith would
fall more lightly on the _salus reipublicæ_, than that of a pedagogue. But
I have heard this greatly disputed; and it seems now generally agreed, that
one good horse-shoe is worth about 2 1/4 Spital sermons.

As Leibnitz, though not murdered, may be said to have died, partly of
the fear that he should be murdered, and partly of vexation that he was
not,--Kant, on the other hand--who had no ambition in that way--had a
narrower escape from a murderer than any man we read of, except Des Cartes.
So absurdly does fortune throw about her favors! The case is told, I think,
in an anonymous life of this very great man. For health's sake, Kant
imposed upon himself, at one time, a walk of six miles every day along a
highroad. This fact becoming known to a man who had his private reasons for
committing murder, at the third milestone from Königsberg, he waited for
his "intended," who came up to time as duly as a mail-coach. But for an
accident, Kant was a dead man. However, on considerations of "morality," it
happened that the murderer preferred a little child, whom he saw playing in
the road, to the old transcendentalist: this child he murdered; and thus it
happened that Kant escaped. Such is the German account of the matter; but
my opinion is--that the murderer was an amateur, who felt how little would
be gained to the cause of good taste by murdering an old, arid, and adust
metaphysician; there was no room for display, as the man could not possibly
look more like a mummy when dead, than he had done alive.

Thus, gentlemen, I have traced the connection between philosophy and our
art, until insensibly I find that I have wandered into our own era. This I
shall not take any pains to characterize apart from that which preceded
it, for, in fact, they have no distinct character. The seventeenth and
eighteenth centuries, together with so much of the nineteenth as we have
yet seen, jointly compose the Augustan age of murder. The finest work of
the seventeenth century is, unquestionably, the murder of Sir Edmondbury
Godfrey, which has my entire approbation. At the same time, it must be
observed, that the quantity of murder was not great in this century, at
least amongst our own artists; which, perhaps, is attributable to the want
of enlightened patronage. _Sint Mæcenates, non deerunt, Flacce, Marones_.
Consulting Grant's "Observations on the Bills of Mortality," (4th edition,
Oxford, 1665,) I find, that out of 229,250, who died in London during one
period of twenty years in the seventeenth century, not more than eighty-six
were murdered; that is, about four three-tenths per annum. A small number
this, gentlemen, to found an academy upon; and certainly, where the
quantity is so small, we have a right to expect that the quality should be
first-rate. Perhaps it was; yet, still I am of opinion that the best artist
in this century was not equal to the best in that which followed. For
instance, however praiseworthy the case of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey may be
(and nobody can be more sensible of its merits than I am), still I cannot
consent to place it on a level with that of Mrs. Ruscombe of Bristol,
either as to originality of design, or boldness and breadth of style. This
good lady's murder took place early in the reign of George III., a reign
which was notoriously favorable to the arts generally. She lived in College
Green, with a single maid-servant, neither of them having any pretension
to the notice of history but what they derived from the great artist whose
workmanship I am recording. One fine morning, when all Bristol was alive
and in motion, some suspicion arising, the neighbors forced an entrance
into the house, and found Mrs. Ruscombe murdered in her bed-room, and the
servant murdered on the stairs: this was at noon; and, not more than two
hours before, both mistress and servant had been seen alive. To the best of
my remembrance, this was in 1764; upwards of sixty years, therefore, have
now elapsed, and yet the artist is still undiscovered. The suspicions of
posterity have settled upon two pretenders--a baker and a chimney-sweeper.
But posterity is wrong; no unpractised artist could have conceived so bold
an idea as that of a noon-day murder in the heart of a great city. It was
no obscure baker, gentlemen, or anonymous chimney-sweeper, be assured, that
executed this work. I know who it was. (_Here there was a general buzz,
which at length broke out into open applause; upon which the lecturer
blushed, and went on with much earnestness_.) For Heaven's sake, gentlemen,
do not mistake me; it was not I that did it. I have not the vanity to think
myself equal to any such achievement; be assured that you greatly overrate
my poor talents; Mrs. Ruscombe's affair was far beyond my slender
abilities. But I came to know who the artist was, from a celebrated
surgeon, who assisted at his dissection. This gentleman had a private
museum in the way of his profession, one corner of which was occupied by a
cast from a man of remarkably fine proportions.

"That," said the surgeon, "is a cast from the celebrated Lancashire
highwayman, who concealed his profession for some time from his neighbors,
by drawing woollen stockings over his horse's legs, and in that way
muffling the clatter which he must else have made in riding up a flagged
alley that led to his stable. At the time of his execution for highway
robbery, I was studying under Cruickshank: and the man's figure was
so uncommonly fine, that no money or exertion was spared to get into
possession of him with the least possible delay. By the connivance of the
under-sheriff he was cut down within the legal time, and instantly put into
a chaise and four; so that, when he reached Cruickshank's he was positively
not dead. Mr. ----, a young student at that time, had the honor of giving
him the _coup de grâce_, and finishing the sentence of the law." This
remarkable anecdote, which seemed to imply that all the gentlemen in the
dissecting-room were amateurs of our class, struck me a good deal; and I
was repeating it one day to a Lancashire lady, who thereupon informed me,
that she had herself lived in the neighborhood of that highwayman, and well
remembered two circumstances, which combined, in the opinion of all his
neighbors, to fix upon him the credit of Mrs. Ruscombe's affair. One was,
the fact of his absence for a whole fortnight at the period of that murder:
the other, that, within a very little time after, the neighborhood of this
highwayman was deluged with dollars: now Mrs. Ruscombe was known to have
hoarded about two thousand of that coin. Be the artist, however, who he
might, the affair remains a durable monument of his genius; for such was
the impression of awe, and the sense of power left behind, by the strength
of conception manifested in this murder, that no tenant (as I was told in
1810) had been found up to that time for Mrs. Ruscombe's house.

But, whilst I thus eulogize the Ruscombian case, let me not be supposed to
overlook the many other specimens of extraordinary merit spread over the
face of this century. Such cases, indeed, as that of Miss Bland, or of
Captain Donnellan, and Sir Theophilus Boughton, shall never have any
countenance from me. Fie on these dealers in poison, say I: can they not
keep to the old honest way of cutting throats, without introducing such
abominable innovations from Italy? I consider all these poisoning cases,
compared with the legitimate style, as no better than wax-work by the side
of sculpture, or a lithographic print by the side of a fine Volpato. But,
dismissing these, there remain many excellent works of art in a pure style,
such as nobody need be ashamed to own, as every candid connoisseur will
admit. _Candid_, observe, I say; for great allowances must be made in
these cases; no artist can ever be sure of carrying through his own fine
preconception. Awkward disturbances will arise; people will not submit to
have their throats cut quietly; they will run, they will kick, they will
bite; and whilst the portrait painter often has to complain of too much
torpor in his subject, the artist, in our line, is generally embarrassed by
too much animation. At the same time, however disagreeable to the artist,
this tendency in murder to excite and irritate the subject, is certainly
one of its advantages to the world in general, which we ought not to
overlook, since it favors the development of latent talent. Jeremy Taylor
notices with admiration, the extraordinary leaps which people will take
under the influence of fear. There was a striking instance of this in the
recent case of the M'Keands; the boy cleared a height, such as he will
never clear again to his dying day. Talents also of the most brilliant
description for thumping, and indeed for all the gymnastic exercises,
have sometimes been developed by the panic which accompanies our artists;
talents else buried and hid under a bushel to the possessors, as much as to
their friends. I remember an interesting illustration of this fact, in a
case which I learned in Germany.

Riding one day in the neighborhood of Munich, I overtook a distinguished
amateur of our society, whose name I shall conceal. This gentleman informed
me that, finding himself wearied with the frigid pleasures (so he
called them) of mere amateurship, he had quitted England for the
continent--meaning to practise a little professionally. For this purpose
he resorted to Germany, conceiving the police in that part of Europe to be
more heavy and drowsy than elsewhere. His _debut_ as a practitioner took
place at Mannheim; and, knowing me to be a brother amateur, he freely
communicated the whole of his maiden adventure. "Opposite to my lodging,"
said he, "lived a baker: he was somewhat of a miser, and lived quite alone.
Whether it were his great expanse of chalky face, or what else, I know
not--but the fact was, I 'fancied' him, and resolved to commence business
upon his throat, which by the way he always carried bare--a fashion which
is very irritating to my desires. Precisely at eight o'clock in the
evening, I observed that he regularly shut up his windows. One night I
watched him when thus engaged--bolted in after him--locked the door--and,
addressing him with great suavity, acquainted him with the nature of my
errand; at the same time advising him to make no resistance, which would be
mutually unpleasant. So saying, I drew out my tools; and was proceeding to
operate. But at this spectacle, the baker, who seemed to have been struck
by catalepsy at my first announce, awoke into tremendous agitation. 'I will
_not_ be murdered!' he shrieked aloud; 'what for will I lose my precious
throat?' 'What for?' said I; 'if for no other reason, for this--that you
put alum into your bread. But no matter, alum or no alum, (for I was
resolved to forestall any argument on that point,) know that I am a
virtuoso in the art of murder--am desirous of improving myself in its
details--and am enamored of your vast surface of throat, to which I am
determined to be a customer.' 'Is it so?' said he, 'but I'll find you
custom in another line;' and so saying, he threw himself into a boxing
attitude. The very idea of his boxing struck me as ludicrous. It is true,
a London baker had distinguished himself in the ring, and became known
to fame under the title of the Master of the Rolls; but he was young and
unspoiled: whereas this man was a monstrous feather-bed in person, fifty
years old, and totally out of condition. Spite of all this, however, and
contending against me, who am a master in the art, he made so desperate a
defence, that many times I feared he might turn the tables upon me;
and that I, an amateur, might be murdered by a rascally baker. What a
situation! Minds of sensibility will sympathize with my anxiety. How severe
it was, you may understand by this, that for the first thirteen rounds the
baker had the advantage. Round the fourteenth, I received a blow on
the right eye, which closed it up; in the end, I believe, this was my
salvation: for the anger it roused in me was so great that, in this and
every one of the three following rounds, I floored the baker.

"Round 18th. The baker came up piping, and manifestly the worse for wear.
His geometrical exploits in the four last rounds had done him no good.
However, he showed some skill in stopping a message which I was sending to
his cadaverous mug; in delivering which, my foot slipped, and I went down.

"Round 19th. Surveying the baker, I became ashamed of having been so
much bothered by a shapeless mass of dough; and I went in fiercely,
and administered some severe punishment. A rally took place--both went
down--baker undermost--ten to three on amateur.

"Round 20th. The baker jumped up with surprising agility; indeed, he
managed his pins capitally, and fought wonderfully, considering that he was
drenched in perspiration; but the shine was now taken out of him, and his
game was the mere effect of panic. It was now clear that he could not last
much longer. In the course of this round we tried the weaving system, in
which I had greatly the advantage, and hit him repeatedly on the conk.
My reason for this was, that his conk was covered with carbuncles; and I
thought I should vex him by taking such liberties with his conk, which in
fact I did.

"The three next rounds, the master of the rolls staggered about like a cow
on the ice. Seeing how matters stood, in round twenty-fourth I whispered
something into his ear, which sent him down like a shot. It was nothing
more than my private opinion of the value of his throat at an annuity
office. This little confidential whisper affected him greatly; the very
perspiration was frozen on his face, and for the next two rounds I had it
all my own way. And when I called _time_ for the twenty-seventh round, he
lay like a log on the floor."

After which, said I to the amateur, "It may be presumed that you
accomplished your purpose." "You are right," said he mildly, "I did; and a
great satisfaction, you know, it was to my mind, for by this means I killed
two birds with one stone;" meaning that he had both thumped the baker and
murdered him. Now, for the life of me, I could not see _that_; for, on the
contrary, to my mind it appeared that he had taken two stones to kill one
bird, having been obliged to take the conceit out of him first with his
fist, and then with his tools. But no matter for his logic. The moral of
his story was good, for it showed what an astonishing stimulus to latent
talent is contained in any reasonable prospect of being murdered. A
pursy, unwieldy, half cataleptic baker of Mannheim had absolutely fought
six-and-twenty rounds with an accomplished English boxer merely upon this
inspiration; so greatly was natural genius exalted and sublimed by the
genial presence of his murderer.

Really, gentlemen, when one hears of such things as these, it becomes a
duty, perhaps, a little to soften that extreme asperity with which most
men speak of murder. To hear people talk, you would suppose that all the
disadvantages and inconveniences were on the side of being murdered, and
that there were none at all in _not_ being murdered. But considerate men
think otherwise. "Certainly," says Jeremy Taylor, "it is a less temporal
evil to fall by the rudeness of a sword than the violence of a fever: and
the axe" (to which he might have added the ship-carpenter's mallet and the
crow-bar) "a much less affliction than a strangury." Very true; the
bishop talks like a wise man and an amateur, as he is; and another great
philosopher, Marcus Aurelius, was equally above the vulgar prejudices on
this subject. He declares it to be one of "the noblest functions of reason
to know whether it is time to walk out of the world or not." (Book III.,
Collers' Translation.) No sort of knowledge being rarer than this, surely
_that_ man must be a most philanthropic character, who undertakes to
instruct people in this branch of knowledge gratis, and at no little hazard
to himself. All this, however, I throw out only in the way of speculation
to future moralists; declaring in the meantime my own private conviction,
that very few men commit murder upon philanthropic or patriotic principles,
and repeating what I have already said once at least--that, as to the
majority of murderers, they are very incorrect characters.

With respect to Williams's murders, the sublimest and most entire in their
excellence that ever were committed, I shall not allow myself to speak
incidentally. Nothing less than an entire lecture, or even an entire course
of lectures, would suffice to expound their merits. But one curious fact,
connected with his case, I shall mention, because it seems to imply that
the blaze of his genius absolutely dazzled the eye of criminal justice. You
all remember, I doubt not, that the instruments with which he executed his
first great work, (the murder of the Marrs,) were a ship-carpenter's mallet
and a knife. Now the mallet belonged to an old Swede, one John Petersen,
and bore his initials. This instrument Williams left behind him, in Marr's
house, and it fell into the hands of the magistrates. Now, gentlemen, it
is a fact that the publication of this circumstance of the initials led
immediately to the apprehension of Williams, and, if made earlier, would
have prevented his second great work, (the murder of the Williamsons,)
which took place precisely twelve days after. But the magistrates kept back
this fact from the public for the entire twelve days, and until that second
work was accomplished. That finished, they published it, apparently feeling
that Williams had now done enough for his fame, and that his glory was at
length placed beyond the reach of accident.

As to Mr. Thurtell's case, I know not what to say. Naturally, I have every
disposition to think highly of my predecessor in the chair of this society;
and I acknowledge that his lectures were unexceptionable. But, speaking
ingenuously, I do really think that his principal performance, as an
artist, has been much overrated. I admit that at first I was myself carried
away by the general enthusiasm. On the morning when the murder was made
known in London, there was the fullest meeting of amateurs that I have ever
known since the days of Williams; old bed-ridden connoisseurs, who had got
into a peevish way of sneering and complaining "that there was nothing
doing," now hobbled down to our club-room: such hilarity, such benign
expression of general satisfaction, I have rarely witnessed. On every side
you saw people shaking hands, congratulating each other, and forming
dinner parties for the evening; and nothing was to be heard but triumphant
challenges of--"Well! will _this_ do?" "Is _this_ the right thing?" "Are
you satisfied at last?" But, in the midst of this, I remember we all
grew silent on hearing the old cynical amateur, L. S----, that _laudator
temporis acti_, stumping along with his wooden leg; he entered the room
with his usual scowl, and, as he advanced, he continued to growl and
stutter the whole way--"Not an original idea in the whole piece--mere
plagiarism,--base plagiarism from hints that I threw out! Besides, his
style is as hard as Albert Durer, and as coarse as Fuseli." Many thought
that this was mere jealousy, and general waspishness; but I confess that,
when the first glow of enthusiasm had subsided, I have found most judicious
critics to agree that there was something _falsetto_ in the style of
Thurtell. The fact is, he was a member of our society, which naturally gave
a friendly bias to our judgments; and his person was universally familiar
to the cockneys, which gave him, with the whole London public, a temporary
popularity, that his pretensions are not capable of supporting; for
_opinionum commenta delet dies, naturæ judicia confirmat_. There was,
however, an unfinished design of Thurtell's for the murder of a man with a
pair of dumb-bells, which I admired greatly; it was a mere outline, that he
never completed; but to my mind it seemed every way superior to his chief
work. I remember that there was great regret expressed by some amateurs
that this sketch should have been left in an unfinished state: but there
I cannot agree with them; for the fragments and first bold outlines of
original artists have often a felicity about them which is apt to vanish in
the management of the details.

The case of the M'Keands I consider far beyond the vaunted performance of
Thurtell,--indeed above all praise; and bearing that relation, in fact, to
the immortal works of Williams, which the Æneid bears to the Iliad.

But it is now time that I should say a few words about the principles of
murder, not with a view to regulate your practice, but your judgment: as
to old women, and the mob of newspaper readers, they are pleased with
anything, provided it is bloody enough. But the mind of sensibility
requires something more. _First_, then, let us speak of the kind of person
who is adapted to the purpose of the murderer; _secondly_, of the place
where; _thirdly_, of the time when, and other little circumstances.

As to the person, I suppose it is evident that he ought to be a good man;
because, if he were not, he might himself, by possibility, be contemplating
murder at the very time; and such "diamond-cut-diamond" tussles, though
pleasant enough where nothing better is stirring, are really not what a
critic can allow himself to call murders. I could mention some people (I
name no names) who have been murdered by other people in a dark lane; and
so far all seemed correct enough; but, on looking farther into the matter,
the public have become aware that the murdered party was himself, at the
moment, planning to rob his murderer, at the least, and possibly to murder
him, if he had been strong enough. Whenever that is the case, or may be
thought to be the case, farewell to all the genuine effects of the art. For
the final purpose of murder, considered as a fine art, is precisely the
same as that of tragedy, in Aristotle's account of it, viz., "to cleanse
the heart by means of pity and terror." Now, terror there may be, but how
can there be any pity for one tiger destroyed by another tiger?

It is also evident that the person selected ought not to be a public
character. For instance, no judicious artist would have attempted to murder
Abraham Newland. For the case was this; everybody read so much about
Abraham Newland, and so few people ever saw him, that there was a fixed
belief that he was an abstract idea. And I remember that once, when I
happened to mention that I had dined at a coffee-house in company with
Abraham Newland, everybody looked scornfully at me, as though I had
pretended to have played at billiards with Prester John, or to have had an
affair of honor with the Pope. And, by the way, the Pope would be a very
improper person to murder: for he has such a virtual ubiquity as the father
of Christendom, and, like the cuckoo, is so often heard but never seen,
that I suspect most people regard _him_ also as an abstract idea. Where,
indeed, a public character is in the habit of giving dinners, "with every
delicacy of the season," the case is very different: every person is
satisfied that _he_ is no abstract idea; and, therefore, there can be no
impropriety in murdering him; only that his murder will fall into the class
of assassinations, which I have not yet treated.

_Thirdly_. The subject chosen ought to be in good health: for it is
absolutely barbarous to murder a sick person, who is usually quite unable
to bear it. On this principle, no cockney ought to be chosen who is above
twenty-five, for after that age he is sure to be dyspeptic. Or at least, if
a man will hunt in that warren, he ought to murder a couple at one time; if
the cockneys chosen should be tailors, he will of course think it his duty,
on the old established equation, to murder eighteen. And, here, in this
attention to the comfort of sick people, you will observe the usual effect
of a fine art to soften and refine the feelings. The world in general,
gentlemen, are very bloody-minded; and all they want in a murder is a
copious effusion of blood; gaudy display in this point is enough for
_them_. But the enlightened connoisseur is more refined in his taste;
and from our art, as from all the other liberal arts when thoroughly
cultivated, the result is--to improve and to humanize the heart; so true is
it, that--

  ----"Ingenuas didicisse fideliter artes,
  Emollit mores, nec sinit esse feros."

A philosophic friend, well known for his philanthropy and general
benignity, suggests that the subject chosen ought also to have a family of
young children wholly dependent on his exertions, by way of deepening the
pathos. And, undoubtedly, this is a judicious caution. Yet I would not
insist too keenly on this condition. Severe good taste unquestionably
demands it; but still, where the man was otherwise unobjectionable in point
of morals and health, I would not look with too curious a jealousy to a
restriction which might have the effect of narrowing the artist's sphere.

So much for the person. As to the time, the place, and the tools, I have
many things to say, which at present I have no room for. The good sense of
the practitioner has usually directed him to night and privacy. Yet
there have not been wanting cases where this rule was departed from with
excellent effect. In respect to time, Mrs. Ruscombe's case is a beautiful
exception, which I have already noticed; and in respect both to time and
place, there is a fine exception in the annals of Edinburgh, (year 1805,)
familiar to every child in Edinburgh, but which has unaccountably been
defrauded of its due portion of fame amongst English amateurs. The case
I mean is that of a porter to one of the banks, who was murdered whilst
carrying a bag of money, in broad daylight, on turning out of the High
Street, one of the most public streets in Europe, and the murderer is to
this hour undiscovered.

  "Sed fugit interea, fugit irreparabile tcmpus,
  Singula dum capti circumvectamur amore."

And now, gentlemen, in conclusion, let me again solemnly disclaim all
pretensions on my own part to the character of a professional man. I never
attempted any murder in my life, except in the year 1801, upon the body of
a tom-cat; and _that_ turned out differently from my intention. My
purpose, I own, was downright murder. "Semper ego auditor tantum?" said I,
"nunquamne reponam?" And I went down stairs in search of Tom at one o'clock
on a dark night, with the "animus," and no doubt with the fiendish looks,
of a murderer. But when I found him, he was in the act of plundering the
pantry of bread and other things. Now this gave a new turn to the affair;
for the time being one of general scarcity, when even Christians were
reduced to the use of potato-bread, rice-bread, and all sorts of things, it
was downright treason in a tom-cat to be wasting good wheaten-bread in the
way he was doing. It instantly became a patriotic duty to put him to death;
and as I raised aloft and shook the glittering steel, I fancied myself
rising like Brutus, effulgent from a crowd of patriots, and, as I stabbed
him, I

  "called aloud on Tully's name,
  And bade the father of his country hail!"

Since then, what wandering thoughts I may have had of attempting the life
of an ancient ewe, of a superannuated hen, and such "small deer," are
locked up in the secrets of my own breast; but for the higher departments
of the art, I confess myself to be utterly unfit. My ambition does not rise
so high. No, gentlemen, in the words of Horace,

  "---fungos vice cotis, excutum
  Reddere ere quæ ferrum valet, exsors ipsa secandi."

DOCTOR NORTH: You are a liberal man: liberal in the true classical sense,
not in the slang sense of modern politicians and education-mongers. Being
so, I am sure that you will sympathize with my case. I am an ill-used man,
Dr. North--particularly ill used; and, with your permission, I will briefly
explain how. A black scene of calumny will be laid open; but you, Doctor,
will make all things square again. One frown from you, directed to the
proper quarter, or a warning shake of the crutch, will set me right in
public opinion, which at present, I am sorry to say, is rather hostile to
me and mine--all owing to the wicked arts of slanderers. But you shall
hear.

A good many years ago you may remember that I came forward in the character
of a _dilettante_ in murder. Perhaps _dilettante_ may be too strong a word.
_Connoisseur_ is better suited to the scruples and infirmity of public
taste. I suppose there is no harm in _that_ at least. A man is not bound
to put his eyes, ears, and understanding into his breeches pocket when he
meets with a murder. If he is not in a downright comatose state, I suppose
he must see that one murder is better or worse than another in point of
good taste. Murders have their little differences and shades of merit as
well as statues, pictures, oratorios, cameos, intaglios, or what not. You
may be angry with the man for talking too much, or too publicly, (as to the
too much, that I deny--a man can never cultivate his taste too highly;) but
you must allow him to think, at any rate; and you, Doctor, you think, I am
sure, both deeply and correctly on the subject. Well, would you believe it?
all my neighbors came to hear of that little æsthetic essay which you had
published; and, unfortunately, hearing at the very same time of a club that
I as connected with, and a dinner at which I presided--both tending to the
same little object as the essay, viz., the diffusion of a just taste among
her majesty's subjects, they got up the most barbarous calumnies against
me. In particular, they said that I, or that the club, which comes to the
same thing, had offered bounties on well conducted homicides--with a scale
of drawbacks, in case of any one defect or flaw, according to a table
issued to private friends. Now, Doctor, I'll tell you the whole truth about
the dinner and the club, and you'll see how malicious the world is. But
first let me tell you, confidentially, what my real principles are upon the
matters in question.

As to murder, I never committed one in my life. It's a well known thing
amongst all my friends. I can get a paper to certify as much, signed by
lots of people. Indeed, if you come to that, I doubt whether many
people could produce as strong a certificate. Mine would be as big as a
table-cloth. There is indeed one member of the club, who pretends to say
that he caught me once making too free with his throat on a club night,
after every body else had retired. But, observe, he shuffles in his story
according to his state of civilation. When not far gone, he contents
himself with saying that he caught me ogling his throat; and that I was
melancholy for some weeks after, and that my voice sounded in a way
expressing, to the nice ear of a connoisseur, _the sense of opportunities
lost_--but the club all know that he's a disappointed man himself, and that
he speaks querulously at times about the fatal neglect of a man's coming
abroad without his tools. Besides, all this is an affair between two
amateurs, and every body makes allowances for little asperities
and sorenesses in such a case. "But," say you, "If no murderer, my
correspondent may have encouraged, or even have bespoke a murder." No, upon
my honor--nothing of the kind. And that was the very point I wished to
argue for your satisfaction. The truth is, I am a very particular man in
everything relating to murder; and perhaps I carry my delicacy too far. The
Stagyrite most justly, and possibly with a view to my case, placed virtue
in the [Greek: to meson] or middle point between two extremes. A golden
mean is certainly what every man should aim at. But it is easier talking
than doing; and, my infirmity being notoriously too much milkiness of
heart, I find it difficult to maintain that steady equatorial line between
the two poles of too much murder on the one hand, and too little on the
other. I am too soft--Doctor, too soft; and people get excused through
me--nay, go through life without an attempt made upon them, that ought not
to be excused. I believe if I had the management of things, there would
hardly be a murder from year's end to year's end. In fact I'm for virtue,
and goodness, and all that sort of thing. And two instances I'll give you
to what an extremity I carry my virtue. The first may seem a trifle; but
not if you knew my nephew, who was certainly born to be hanged, and would
have been so long ago, but for my restraining voice. He is horribly
ambitious, and thinks himself a man of cultivated taste in most branches of
murder, whereas, in fact, he has not one idea on the subject, but such
as he has stolen from me. This is so well known, that the club has twice
blackballed him, though every indulgence was shown to him as my relative.
People came to me and said--"Now really, President, we would do much to
serve a relative of yours. But still, what can be said? You know yourself
that he'll disgrace us. If we were to elect him, why, the next thing we
should hear of would be some vile butcherly murder, by way of justifying
our choice. And what sort of a concern would it be? You know, as well as we
do, that it would be a disgraceful affair, more worthy of the shambles than
of an artist's _attelier_. He would fall upon some great big man, some huge
farmer returning drunk from a fair. There would be plenty of blood, and
_that_ he would expect us to take in lieu of taste, finish, scenical
grouping. Then, again, how would he tool? Why, most probably with a cleaver
and a couple of paving stones: so that the whole _coup d'oeil_ would remind
you rather of some hideous ogre or cyclops, than of the delicate operator
of the nineteenth century." The picture was drawn with the hand of truth;
_that_ I could not but allow, and, as to personal feelings in the matter, I
dismissed them from the first. The next morning I spoke to my nephew--I was
delicately situated, as you see, but I determined that no consideration
should induce me to flinch from my duty. "John," said I, "you seem to me to
have taken an erroneous view of life and its duties. Pushed on by ambition,
you are dreaming rather of what it might be glorious to attempt, than what
it would be possible for you to accomplish. Believe me, it is not necessary
to a man's respectability that he should commit a murder. Many a man has
passed through life most respectably, without attempting any species of
homicide--good, bad, or indifferent. It is your first duty to ask yourself,
_quid valeant humeri, quid ferre recusent_? we cannot all be brilliant men
in this life. And it is for your interest to be contented rather with a
humble station well filled, than to shock every body with failures, the
more conspicuous by contrast with the ostentation of their promises." John
made no answer, he looked very sulky at the moment, and I am in high
hopes that I have saved a near relation from making a fool of himself by
attempting what is as much beyond his capacity as an epic poem. Others,
however, tell me that he is meditating a revenge upon me and the whole
club. But let this be as it may, _liberavi animam meam_; and, as you see,
have run some risk with a wish to diminish the amount of homicide. But the
other case still more forcibly illustrates my virtue. A man came to me as
a candidate for the place of my servant, just then vacant. He had the
reputation of having dabbled a little in our art; some said not without
merit. What startled me, however, was, that he supposed this art to be
part of his regular duties in my service. Now that was a thing I would not
allow; so I said at once, "Richard (or James, as the case might be,) you
misunderstand my character. If a man will and must practise this difficult
(and allow me to add, dangerous) branch of art--if he has an overruling
genius for it, why, he might as well pursue his studies whilst living in my
service as in another's. And also, I may observe, that it can do no harm
either to himself or to the subject on whom he operates, that he should
be guided by men of more taste than himself. Genius may do much, but long
study of the art must always entitle a man to offer advice. So far I will
go--general principles I will suggest. But as to any particular case, once
for all I will have nothing to do with it. Never tell me of any special
work of art you are meditating--I set my face against it _in toto_. For if
once a man indulges himself in murder, very soon he comes to think
little of robbing; and from robbing he comes next to drinking and
Sabbath-breaking, and from that to incivility and procrastination. Once
begin upon this downward path, you never know where you are to stop. Many
a man has dated his ruin from some murder or other that perhaps he thought
little of at the time. _Principiis obsta_--that's my rule." Such was my
speech, and I have always acted up to it; so if that is not being virtuous,
I should be glad to know what is. But now about the dinner and the club.
The club was not particularly of my creation; it arose pretty much as other
similar associations, for the propagation of truth and the communication of
new ideas, rather from the necessities of things than upon any one man's
suggestion. As to the dinner, if any man more than another could be held
responsible for that, it was a member known amongst us by the name of
_Toad-in-the-hole_. He was so called from his gloomy misanthropical
disposition, which led him into constant disparagements of all modern
murders as vicious abortions, belonging to no authentic school of art. The
finest performances of our own age he snarled at cynically; and at length
this querulous humor grew upon him so much, and he became so notorious as a
_laudator tentporis acti_, that few people cared to seek his society. This
made him still more fierce and truculent. He went about muttering and
growling; wherever you met him he was soliloquizing and saying, "despicable
pretender--without grouping--without two ideas upon handling--without"--and
there you lost him. At length existence seemed to be painful to him;
he rarely spoke, he seemed conversing with phantoms in the air, his
housekeeper informed us that his reading was nearly confined to _God's
Revenge upon Murder_, by Reynolds, and a more ancient book of the same
title, noticed by Sir Walter Scott in his _Fortunes of Nigel_. Sometimes,
perhaps, he might read in the Newgate Calendar down to the year 1788, but
he never looked into a book more recent. In fact, he had a theory with
regard to the French Revolution, as having been the great cause of
degeneration in murder. "Very soon, sir," he used to say, "men will have
lost the art of killing poultry: the very rudiments of the art will
have perished!" In the year 1811 he retired from general society.
Toad-in-the-hole was no more seen in any public resort. We missed him from
his wonted haunts--nor up the lawn, nor at the wood was he. By the side of
the main conduit his listless length at noontide he would stretch, and pore
upon the filth that muddled by. "Even dogs are not what they were, sir--not
what they should be. I remember in my grandfather's time that some dogs had
an idea of murder. I have known a mastiff lie in ambush for a rival, sir,
and murder him with pleasing circumstances of good taste. Yes, sir, I knew
a tom-cat that was an assassin. But now"--and then, the subject growing too
painful, he dashed his hand to his forehead, and went off abruptly in a
homeward direction towards his favorite conduit, where he was seen by an
amateur in such a state that he thought it dangerous to address him. Soon
after he shut himself entirely up; it was understood that he had resigned
himself to melancholy; and at length the prevailing notion was, that
Toad-in-the-hole had hanged himself.

The world was wrong _there_, as it has been on some other questions.
Toad-in-the-hole might be sleeping, but dead he was not; and of that we
soon had ocular proof. One morning in 1812, an amateur surprised us with
the news that he had seen Toad-in-the-hole brushing with hasty steps the
dews away to meet the postman by the conduit side. Even that was something:
how much more, to hear that he had shaved his beard--had laid aside his
sad-colored clothes, and was adorned like a bridegroom of ancient days.
What could be the meaning of all this? Was Toad-in-the-hole mad? or how?
Soon after the secret was explained--in more than a figurative sense
"the murder was out." For in came the London morning papers, by which
it appeared that but three days before a murder, the most superb of the
century by many degrees had occurred in the heart of London. I need hardly
say, that this was the great exterminating _chef-d'oeuvre_ of Williams at
Mr. Marr's, No. 29, Ratcliffe Highway. That was the _début_ of the artist;
at least for anything the public knew. What occurred at Mr. Williamson's
twelve nights afterwards--the second work turned out from the same
chisel--some people pronounced even superior. But Toad-in-the-hole always
"reclaimed"--he was even angry at comparisons. "This vulgar _gout de
comparaison_, as La Bruyère calls it," he would often remark, "will be
our ruin; each work has its own separate characteristics--each in and for
itself is incomparable. One, perhaps, might suggest the _Iliad_--the other
the _Odyssey_: what do you get by such comparisons? Neither ever was, or
will be surpassed; and when you've talked for hours, you must still come
back to that." Vain, however, as all criticism might be, he often said that
volumes might be written on each case for itself; and he even proposed to
publish in quarto on the subject.

Meantime, how had Toad-in-the-hole happened to hear of this great work
of art so early in the morning? He had received an account by express,
dispatched by a correspondent in London, who watched the progress of art On
_Toady's_ behalf, with a general commission to send off a special express,
at whatever cost, in the event of any estimable works appearing--how much
more upon occasion of a _ne plus ultra_ in art! The express arrived in the
night-time; Toad-in-the-hole was then gone to bed; he had been muttering
and grumbling for hours, but of course he was called up. On reading the
account, he threw his arms round the express, called him his brother and
his preserver; settled a pension upon him for three lives, and expressed
his regret at not having it in his power to knight him. We, on our part--we
amateurs, I mean--having heard that he was abroad, and therefore had _not_
hanged himself, made sure of soon seeing him amongst us. Accordingly he
soon arrived, knocked over the porter on his road to the reading-room; he
seized every man's hand as he passed him--wrung it almost frantically, and
kept ejaculating, "Why, now here's something like a murder!--this is the
real thing--this is genuine--this is what you can approve, can recommend to
a friend: this--says every man, on reflection--this is the thing that ought
to be!" Then, looking at particular friends, he said--"Why, Jack, how are
you? Why, Tom, how are you? Bless me, you look ten years younger than
when I last saw you." "No, sir," I replied, "It is you who look ten years
younger." "Do I? well, I should'nt wonder if I did; such works are
enough to make us all young." And in fact the general opinion is, that
Toad-in-the-hole would have died but for this regeneration of art, which
he called a second age of Leo the Tenth; and it was our duty, he said
solemnly, to commemorate it. At present, and _en attendant_--rather as an
occasion for a public participation in public sympathy, than as in itself
any commensurate testimony of our interest--he proposed that the club
should meet and dine together. A splendid public dinner, therefore, was
given by the club; to which all amateurs were invited from a distance of
one hundred miles.

Of this dinner there are ample short-hand notes amongst the archives of
the club. But they are not "extended," to speak diplomatically; and the
reporter is missing--I believe, murdered. Meantime, in years long after
that day, and on an occasion perhaps equally interesting, viz., the turning
up of Thugs and Thuggism, another dinner was given. Of this I myself kept
notes, for fear of another accident to the short-hand reporter. And I here
subjoin them. Toad-in-the-hole, I must mention, was present at this dinner.
In fact, it was one of its sentimental incidents. Being as old as the
valleys at the dinner of 1812, naturally he was as old as the hills at the
Thug dinner of 1838. He had taken to wearing his beard again; why, or with
what view, it passes my persimmon to tell you. But so it was. And his
appearance was most benign and venerable. Nothing could equal the angelic
radiance of his smile as he inquired after the unfortunate reporter, (whom,
as a piece of private scandal, I should tell you that he was himself
supposed to have murdered, in a rapture of creative art:) the answer was,
with roars of laughter, from the under-sheriff of our county--"Non est
inventus." Toad-in-the-hole laughed outrageously at this: in fact, we all
thought he was choking; and, at the earnest request of the company, a
musical composer furnished a most beautiful glee upon the occasion,
which was sung five times after dinner, with universal applause and
inextinguishable laughter, the words being these, (and the chorus
so contrived, as most beautifully to mimic the peculiar laughter of
Toad-in-the-hole:)--

  "Et interrogatum est à Toad-in-the hole--Ubi est ille reporter?
  Et responsum est cum cachinno--Non est inventus."


CHORUS.

  "Deinde iteratum est ab omnibus, cum cachinnatione undulante--
  Non est inventus."

Toad-in-the-hole, I ought to mention, about nine years before, when an
express from Edinburgh brought him the earliest intelligence of the
Burke-and-Hare revolution in the art, went mad upon the spot; and, instead
of a pension to the express for even one life, or a knighthood, endeavored
to burke him; in consequence of which he was put into a strait waistcoat.
And that was the reason we had no dinner then. But now all of us were alive
and kicking, strait-waistcoaters and others; in fact, not one absentee
was reported upon the entire roll. There were also many foreign amateurs
present.

Dinner being over, and the cloth drawn, there was a general call made for
the new glee of _Non est inventus_; but, as this would have interfered with
the requisite gravity of the company during the earlier toasts, I overruled
the call. After the national toasts had been given, the first official
toast of the day was, _The Old Man of the Mountains_--drunk in solemn
silence.

Toad-in-the-hole returned thanks in a neat speech. He likened himself to
the Old Man of the Mountains, in a few brief allusions, that made the
company absolutely yell with laughter; and he concluded with giving the
health of

_Mr. Von Hammer_, with many thanks to him for his learned History of the
Old Man and his subjects the assassins.

Upon this I rose and said, that doubtless most of the company were aware
of the distinguished place assigned by orientalists to the very learned
Turkish scholar Von Hammer the Austrian; that he had made the profoundest
researches into our art as connected with those early and eminent artists
the Syrian assassins in the period of the Crusaders; that his work had been
for several years deposited, as a rare treasure of art, in the library
of the club. Even the author's name, gentlemen, pointed him out as the
historian of our art--Von Hammer--

"Yes, yes," interrupted Toad-in-the-hole, who never can sit still--"Yes,
yes, Von Hammer--he's the man for a _malleus hæreticorum_: think rightly
of our art, or he's the man to tickle your catastrophes. You all know what
consideration Williams bestowed on the hammer, or the ship carpenter's
mallet, which is the same thing. Gentlemen, I give you another great
hammer--Charles the Hammer, the Marteau, or, in old French, the Martel--he
hammered the Saracens till they were all as dead as door-nails--he did,
believe me."

"_Charles Martel_, with all the honors."

But the explosion of Toad-in-the-hole, together with the uproarious cheers
for the grandpapa of Charlemagne, had now made the company unmanageable.
The orchestra was again challenged with shouts the stormiest for the new
glee. I made again a powerful effort to overrule the challenge. I might
as well have talked to the winds. I foresaw a tempestuous evening; and I
ordered myself to be strengthened with three waiters on each side; the
vice-president with as many. Symptoms of unruly enthusiasm were beginning
to show out; and I own that I myself was considerably excited as the
orchestra opened with its storm of music, and the impassioned glee
began--"_Et interrogatum est à Toad-in-the-hole--Ubi est ille Reporter_?"
And the frenzy of the passion became absolutely convulsing, as the full
chorus fell in--"_Et iteratum est ab omnibus--Non est inventus_"

By this time I saw how things were going: wine and music were making most
of the amateurs wild. Particularly Toad-in-the-hole, though considerably
above a hundred years old, was getting as vicious as a young leopard. It
was a fixed impression with the company that he had murdered the reporter
in the year 1812; since which time (viz. twenty-six years) "ille reporter"
had been constantly reported "Non est inventus." Consequently, the glee
about himself, which of itself was most tumultuous and jubilant, carried
him off his feet. Like the famous choral songs amongst the citizens of
Abdera, nobody could hear it without a contagious desire for falling back
into the agitating music of "Et interrogatum est à Toad-in-the-hole," &c.
I enjoined vigilance upon my assessors, and the business of the evening
proceeded.

The next toast was--_The Jewish Sicarii_.

Upon which I made the following explanation to the company:--"Gentlemen,
I am sure it will interest you all to hear that the assassins, ancient as
they were, had a race of predecessors in the very same country. All over
Syria, but particularly in Palestine, during the early years of the Emperor
Nero, there was a band of murderers, who prosecuted their studies in a very
novel manner. They did not practise in the night-time, or in lonely places;
but justly considering that great crowds are in themselves a sort of
darkness by means of the dense pressure and the impossibility of finding
out who it was that gave the blow, they mingled with mobs everywhere;
particularly at the great paschal feast in Jerusalem; where they actually
had the audacity, as Josephus assures us, to press into the temple,--and
whom should they choose for operating upon but Jonathan himself, the
Pontifex Maximus? They murdered him, gentlemen, as beautifully as if they
had had him alone on a moonless night in a dark lane. And when it was
asked, who was the murderer, and where he was"--

"Why, then, it was answered," interrupted Toad-in-the-hole, "_Non est
inventus_." And then, in spite of all I could do or say, the
orchestra opened, and the whole company began--"Et interrogatum est à
Toad-in-the-hole--Ubi est ille Sicarius? Et responsum est ab omnibus--_Non
est inventus_."

When the tempestuous chorus had subsided, I began again:--"Gentlemen, you
will find a very circumstantial account of the Sicarii in at least three
different parts of Josephus; once in Book XX. sect. v. c. 8, of his
_Antiquities_; once in Book I. of his _Wars_: but in sect. 10 of the
chapter first cited you will find a particular description of their
tooling. This is what he says--'They tooled with small scymetars not much
different from the Persian _acinacæ_, but more curved, and for all the
world most like the Roman sickles or _sicæ_.' It is perfectly magnificent,
gentlemen, to hear the sequel of their history. Perhaps the only case
on record where a regular army of murderers was assembled, a _justus
exercitus_, was in the case of these _Sicarii_. They mustered in such
strength in the wilderness, that Festus himself was obliged to march
against them with the Roman legionary force."

Upon which Toad-in-the-hole, that cursed interrupter, broke out
a-singing--"Et interrogatum est à Toad-in-the-hole--Ubi est ille exercitus?
Et responsum est ab omnibus--Non est inventus."

"No, no, Toad--you are wrong for once: that army _was_ found, and was all
cut to pieces in the desert. Heavens, gentlemen, what a sublime picture!
The Roman legions--the wilderness--Jerusalem in the distance--an army of
murderers in the foreground!"

Mr. R., a member, now gave the next toast--"To the further improvement of
Tooling, and thanks to the Committee for their services."

Mr. L., on behalf of the committee who had reported on that subject,
returned thanks. He made an interesting extract from the report, by which
it appeared how very much stress had been laid formerly on the mode of
tooling, by the fathers, both Greek and Latin. In confirmation of this
pleasing fact, he made a very striking statement in reference to the
earliest work of antediluvian art. Father Mersenne, that learned Roman
Catholic, in page one thousand four hundred and thirty-one[1] of his
operose Commentary on Genesis, mentions, on the authority of several
rabbis, that the quarrel of Cain with Abel was about a young woman; that,
by various accounts, Cain had tooled with his teeth, [Abelem fuisse
_morsibus_ dilaceratum à Cain;] by many others, with the jaw-bone of an
ass; which is the tooling adopted by most painters. But it is pleasing to
the mind of sensibility to know that, as science expanded, sounder views
were adopted. One author contends for a pitchfork, St. Chrysostom for a
sword, Irenæus for a scythe, and Prudentius for a hedging-bill. This last
writer delivers his opinion thus:--

  "Frater, probatæ sanctitatis æmulus,
  Germana curvo colla frangit sarculo:"

_i.e_. his brother, jealous of his attested sanctity, fractures his
brotherly throat with a curved hedging-bill. "All which is respectfully
submitted by your committee, not so much as decisive of the question, (for
it is not,) but in order to impress upon the youthful mind the importance
which has ever been attached to the quality of the tooling by such men as
Chrysostom and Irenæus."

"Dang Irenæus!" said Toad-in-the-hole, who now rose impatiently to give the
next toast:--"Our Irish friends; and a speedy revolution in their mode of
tooling, as well as everything else connected with the art!"

"Gentlemen, I'll tell you the plain truth. Every day of the year we take
up a paper, we read the opening of a murder. We say, this is good, this
is charming, this is excellent! But, behold you! scarcely have we read a
little farther, before the word Tipperary or Ballina-something betrays the
Irish manufacture. Instantly we loath it; we call to the waiter; we say,
Waiter, take away this paper; send it out of the house; it is absolutely
offensive to all just taste.' I appeal to every man whether, on finding a
murder (otherwise perhaps promising enough) to be Irish, he does not feel
himself as much insulted as when Madeira being ordered, he finds it to be
Cape; or when, taking up what he takes to be a mushroom, it turns out
what children call a toad-stool. Tithes, politics, or something wrong in
principle, vitiate every Irish murder. Gentlemen, this must be reformed, or
Ireland will not be a land to live in; at least, if we do live there, we
must import all our murders, that's clear." Toad-in-the-hole sat
down growling with suppressed wrath, and the universal "Hear, hear!"
sufficiently showed that he spoke the general feeling.

The next toast was--"The sublime epoch of Burkism and Harism!"

This was drunk with enthusiasm; and one of the members, who spoke to the
question, made a very curious communication to the company:--"Gentlemen,
we fancy Burkism to be a pure invention of our own times: and in fact no
Pancirollus has ever enumerated this branch of art when writing _de rebus
deperditis_. Still I have ascertained that the essential principle of the
art _was_ known to the ancients, although like the art of painting upon
glass, of making the myrrhine cups, &c., it was lost in the dark ages for
want of encouragement. In the famous collection of Greek epigrams made
by Planudes is one upon a very charming little case of Burkism: it is a
perfect little gem of art. The epigram itself I cannot lay my hand upon at
this moment, but the following is an abstract of it by Salmasius, as I find
it in his notes on Vopiscus: 'Est et elegans epigramma Lucilii, (well
he might call it "elegans!") ubi medicus et pollinctor de compacto sic
egerunt, ut medicus ægros omnes curæ suæ commissos occideret:' this was
the basis of the contract, you see, that on the one part the doctor, for
himself and his assigns, doth undertake and contract duly and truly to
murder all the patients committed to his charge: but why? There lies the
beauty of the case--'Et ut pollinctori amico suo traderet pollingendos.'
The _pollinctor_, you are aware, was a person whose business it was to
dress and prepare dead bodies for burial. The original ground of the
transaction appears to have been sentimental: 'He was my friend,' says the
murderous doctor; 'he was dear to me,' in speaking of the pollinctor. But
the law, gentlemen, is stern and harsh: the law will not hear of these
tender motives: to sustain a contract of this nature in law, it is
essential that a 'consideration' should be given. Now what _was_ the
consideration? For thus far all is on the side of the pollinctor: he
will be well paid for his services; but, meantime, the generous, the
noble-minded doctor gets nothing. What _was_ the little consideration
again, I ask, which the law would insist on the doctor's taking? You shall
hear: 'Et ut pollinctor vicissim [Greek: telamonas] quos furabatur de
pollinctione mortuorum medico mitteret doni ad alliganda vulnera eorurn
quos curabat.' Now, the case is clear: the whole went on a principle of
reciprocity which would have kept up the trade for ever. The doctor was
also a surgeon: he could not murder _all_ his patients: some of the
surgical patients must be retained intact; _re infectâ_. For these he
wanted linen bandages. But, unhappily, the Romans wore woollen, on which
account they bathed so often. Meantime, there _was_ linen to be had in
Rome; but it was monstrously dear; and the [Greek: telamones] or linen
swathing bandages, in which superstition obliged them to bind up corpses,
would answer capitally for the surgeon. The doctor, therefore, contracts to
furnish his friend with a constant succession of corpses, provided, and be
it understood always, that his said friend in return should supply him with
one half of the articles he would receive from the friends of the parties
murdered or to be murdered. The doctor invariably recommended his
invaluable friend the pollinctor, (whom let us call the undertaker;) the
undertaker, with equal regard to the sacred rights of friendship, uniformly
recommended the doctor. Like Pylades and Orestes, they were models of a
perfect friendship: in their lives they were lovely, and on the gallows, it
is to be hoped, they were not divided.

"Gentlemen, it makes me laugh horribly, when I think of those two friends
drawing and redrawing on each other: 'Pollinctor in account with Doctor,
debtor by sixteen corpses; creditor by forty-five bandages, two of which
damaged.' Their names unfortunately are lost; but I conceive they must have
been Quintus Burkius and Publius Harius. By the way, gentlemen, has anybody
heard lately of Hare? I understand he is comfortably settled in Ireland,
considerably to the west, and does a little business now and then; but, as
he observes with a sigh, only as a retailer--nothing like the fine thriving
wholesale concern so carelessly blown up at Edinburgh. 'You see what comes
of neglecting business,'--is the chief moral, the [Greek: epimutheon],
as Æsop would say, which he draws from his past experience."

At length came the toast of the day--_Thugdom in all its branches_.

The speeches _attempted_ at this crisis of the dinner were past all
counting. But the applause was so furious, the music so stormy, and the
crashing of glasses so incessant, from the general resolution never again
to drink an inferior toast from the same glass, that my power is not equal
to the task of reporting. Besides which, Toad-in-the-hole now became quite
ungovernable. He kept firing pistols in every direction; sent his servant
for a blunderbuss, and talked of loading with ball-cartridge. We conceived
that his former madness had returned at the mention of Burke and Hare; or
that, being again weary of life, he had resolved to go off in a general
massacre. This we could not think of allowing: it became indispensable,
therefore, to kick him out, which we did with universal consent, the whole
company lending their toes _uno pede_, as I may say, though pitying his
gray hairs and his angelic smile. During the operation the orchestra poured
in their old chorus. The universal company sang, and (what surprised us
most of all) Toad-in-the-hole joined us furiously in singing--

  "Et interrogatum est ab omnibus--Ubi est ille Toad-in-the-hole
  Et responsum est ab omnibus--Non est inventus."

What is to be thought of _her_? What is to be thought of the poor shepherd
girl from the hills and forests of Lorraine, that--like the Hebrew shepherd
boy from the hills and forests of Judæa--rose suddenly out of the quiet,
out of the safety, out of the religious inspiration, rooted in deep
pastoral solitudes, to a station in the van of armies, and to the more
perilous station at the right hand of kings? The Hebrew boy inaugurated his
patriotic mission by an _act_, by a victorious _act_, such as no man could
deny. But so did the girl of Lorraine, if we read her story as it was read
by those who saw her nearest. Adverse armies bore witness to the boy as no
pretender: but so they did to the gentle girl. Judged by the voices of all
who saw them _from a station of good will_, both were found true and loyal
to any promises involved in their first acts. Enemies it was that made the
difference between their subsequent fortunes. The boy rose--to a splendor
and a noon-day prosperity, both personal and public, that rang through the
records of his people, and became a byeword amongst his posterity for a
thousand years, until the sceptre was departing from Judah. The poor,
forsaken girl, on the contrary, drank not herself from that cup of rest
which she had secured for France. She never sang together with the songs
that rose in her native Domrémy, as echoes to the departing steps of
invaders. She mingled not in the festal dances at Vaucouleurs which
celebrated in rapture the redemption of France. No! for her voice was then
silent: No! for her feet were dust. Pure, innocent, noble-hearted girl!
whom, from earliest youth, ever I believed in as full of truth and
self-sacrifice, this was amongst the strongest pledges for _thy_ side,
that never once--no, not for a moment of weakness--didst thou revel in the
vision of coronets and honor from man. Coronets for thee! O no! Honors, if
they come when all is over, are for those that share thy blood.Daughter
of Domrémy, when the gratitude of thy king shall awaken, thou wilt be
sleeping the sleep of the dead. Call her, King of France, but she will not
hear thee! Cite her by thy apparitors to come and receive a robe of honor,
but she will be found _en contumace_. When the thunders of universal
France, as even yet may happen, shall proclaim the grandeur of the poor
shepherd girl that gave up all for her country--thy ear, young shepherd
girl, will have been deaf for five centuries. To suffer and to do, that was
thy portion in this life; to _do_--never for thyself, always for others;
to _suffer_--never in the persons of generous champions, always in thy
own--that was thy destiny; and not for a moment was it hidden from thyself.
Life, thou saidst, is short: and the sleep which is in the grave, is long!
Let me use that life, so transitory, for the glory of those heavenly dreams
destined to comfort the sleep which is so long. This pure creature--pure
from every suspicion of even a visionary self-interest, even as she was
pure in senses more obvious--never once did this holy child, as regarded
herself, relax from her belief in the darkness that was travelling to meet
her. She might not prefigure the very manner of her death; she saw not in
vision, perhaps, the aërial altitude of the fiery scaffold, the spectators
without end on every road pouring into Rouen as to a coronation, the
surging smoke, the volleying flames, the hostile faces all around, the
pitying eye that lurked but here and there until nature and imperishable
truth broke loose from artificial restraints; these might not be apparent
through the mists of the hurrying future. But the voice that called her to
death, _that_ she heard for ever.

Great was the throne of France even in those days, and great was he that
sate upon it: but well Joanna knew that not the throne, nor he that sate
upon it, was for _her_; but, on the contrary, that she was for _them_; not
she by them, but they by her, should rise from the dust. Gorgeous were
the lilies of France, and for centuries had the privilege to spread their
beauty over land and sea, until, in another century, the wrath of God and
man combined to wither them; but well Joanna knew, early at Domrémy she had
read that bitter truth, that the lilies of France would decorate no garland
for _her_. Flower nor bud, bell nor blossom, would ever bloom for _her_.

But stop. What reason is there for taking up this subject of Joanna
precisely in this spring of 1847? Might it not have been left till the
spring of 1947? or, perhaps, left till called for? Yes, but it _is_ called
for; and clamorously. You are aware, reader, that amongst the many original
thinkers, whom modern France has produced, one of the reputed leaders is M.
Michelet. All these writers are of a revolutionary cast; not in a political
sense merely, but in all senses; mad, oftentimes, as March hares; crazy
with the laughing-gas of recovered liberty; drunk with the wine-cup of
their mighty Revolution, snorting, whinnying, throwing up their heels, like
wild horses in the boundless pampas, and running races of defiance with
snipes, or with the winds, or with their own shadows, if they can find
nothing else to challenge. Some time or other, I, that have leisure to
read, may introduce _you_, that have not, to two or three dozen of these
writers; of whom I can assure you beforehand that they are often profound,
and at intervals are even as impassioned as if they were come of our best
English blood, and sometimes (because it is not pleasant that people should
be too easy to understand) almost as obscure as if they had been suckled
by transcendental German nurses. But now, confining our attention to M.
Michelet--who is quite sufficient to lead a man into a gallop, requiring
two relays, at least, of fresh readers,--we in England--who know him best
by his worst book, the book against Priests, &c., which has been most
circulated--know him disadvantageously. That book is a rhapsody of
incoherence. M. Michelet was light-headed, I believe, when he wrote it:
and it is well that his keepers overtook him in time to intercept a second
part. But his _History of France_ is quite another thing. A man, in
whatsoever craft he sails, cannot stretch away out of sight when he is
linked to the windings of the shore by towing ropes of history. Facts, and
the consequences of facts, draw the writer back to the falconer's lure from
the giddiest heights of speculation. Here, therefore--in his _France_,--if
not always free from flightiness, if now and then off like a rocket for
an airy wheel in the clouds, M. Michelet, with natural politeness, never
forgets that he has left a large audience waiting for him on earth, and
gazing upwards in anxiety for his return: return, therefore, he does. But
History, though clear of certain temptations in one direction, has separate
dangers of its own. It is impossible so to write a History of France, or
of England--works becoming every hour more indispensable to the
inevitably-political man of this day--without perilous openings for
assault. If I, for instance, on the part of England, should happen to turn
my labors into that channel, and (on the model of Lord Percy going to Chevy
Chase)--

  ----"A vow to God should make
  My pleasure in the Michelet woods
  Three summer days to take,"

--probably from simple delirium, I might hunt M. Michelet into _delirium
tremens_. Two strong angels stand by the side of History, whether French
History or English, as heraldic supporters: the angel of Research on the
left hand, that must read millions of dusty parchments, and of pages
blotted with lies; the angel of Meditation on the right hand, that must
cleanse these lying records with fire, even as of old the draperies of
_asbestos_ were cleansed, and must quicken them into regenerated life.
Willingly I acknowledge that no man will ever avoid innumerable errors of
detail: with so vast a compass of ground to traverse, this is impossible:
but such errors (though I have a bushel on hand, at M. Michelet's service)
are not the game I chase: it is the bitter and unfair spirit in which
M. Michelet writes against England. Even _that_, after all, is but my
secondary object: the real one is Joanna, the Pucelle d'Orleans for
herself.

I am not going to write the History of _La Pucelle_: to do this, or even
circumstantially to report the history of her persecution and bitter death,
of her struggle with false witnesses and with ensnaring judges, it would
be necessary to have before us _all_ the documents, and, therefore, the
collection only now forthcoming in Paris. But _my_ purpose is narrower.
There have been great thinkers, disdaining the careless judgments of
contemporaries, who have thrown themselves boldly on the judgment of a far
posterity, that should have had time to review, to ponder, to compare.
There have been great actors on the stage of tragic humanity that might,
with the same depth of confidence, have appealed from the levity of
compatriot friends--too heartless for the sublime interest of their story,
and too impatient for the labor of sifting its perplexities--to the
magnanimity and justice of enemies. To this class belongs the Maid of Arc.
The Romans were too faithful to the ideal of grandeur in themselves not
to relent, after a generation or two, before the grandeur of Hannibal.
Mithridates--a more doubtful person--yet, merely for the magic perseverance
of his indomitable malice, won from the same Romans the only real honor
that ever he received on earth. And we English have ever shown the same
homage to stubborn enmity. To work unflinchingly for the ruin of England;
to say through life, by word and by deed--_Delenda est Anglia Victrix_!
that one purpose of malice, faithfully pursued, has quartered some people
upon our national funds of homage as by a perpetual annuity. Better than an
inheritance of service rendered to England herself, has sometimes proved
the most insane hatred to England. Hyder Ali, even his far inferior son
Tippoo, and Napoleon, have all benefited by this disposition amongst
ourselves to exaggerate the merit of diabolic enmity. Not one of these men
was ever capable, in a solitary instance, of praising an enemy--[what
do you say to _that_, reader?] and yet in _their_ behalf, we consent to
forget, not their crimes only, but (which is worse) their hideous bigotry
and anti-magnanimous egotism; for nationality it was not. Suffrein, and
some half dozen of other French nautical heroes, because rightly they did
us all the mischief they could, [which was really great] are names justly
reverenced in England. On the same principle, La Pucelle d'Orleans, the
victorious enemy of England, has been destined to receive her deepest
commemoration from the magnanimous justice of Englishmen.

Joanna, as we in England should call her, but, according to her own
statement, Jeanne (or, as M. Michelet asserts, Jean[3]) d'Arc, was born at
Domrémy, a village on the marshes of Lorraine and Champagne, and dependent
upon the town of Vaucouleurs. I have called her a Lorrainer, not simply
because the word is prettier, but because Champagne too odiously reminds
us English of what are for _us_ imaginary wines, which, undoubtedly, _La
Pucelle_ tasted as rarely as we English; we English, because the Champagne
of London is chiefly grown in Devonshire; _La Pucelle_, because the
Champagne of Champagne never, by any chance, flowed into the fountain of
Domrémy, from which only she drank. M. Michelet will have her to be a
_Champenoise_, and for no better reason than that she "took after her
father," who happened to be a _Champenoise_. I am sure she did _not_: for
her father was a filthy old fellow, whom I shall soon teach the judicious
reader to hate. But, (says M. Michelet, arguing the case physiologically)
"she had none of the Lorrainian asperity;" no, it seems she had only "the
gentleness of Champagne, its simplicity mingled with sense and acuteness,
as you find it in Joinville." All these things she had; and she was worth a
thousand Joinvilles, meaning either the prince so called, or the fine old
crusader. But still, though I love Joanna dearly, I cannot shut my eyes
entirely to the Lorraine element of "asperity" in her nature. No; really
now, she must have had a shade of _that_, though very slightly developed--a
mere soupçon, as French cooks express it in speaking of cayenne pepper,
when she caused so many of our English throats to be cut. But could she do
less? No; I always say so; but still you never saw a person kill even a
trout with a perfectly "Champagne" face of "gentleness and simplicity,"
though, often, no doubt, with considerable "acuteness." All your cooks and
butchers wear a _Lorraine_ cast of expression.

These disputes, however, turn on refinements too nice. Domrémy stood
upon the frontiers; and, like other frontiers, produced a _mixed_ race
representing the _cis_ and the _trans_. A river (it is true) formed the
boundary line at this point--the river Meuse; and _that_, in old days,
might have divided the populations; but in these days it did not--there
were bridges, there were ferries, and weddings crossed from the right bank
to the left. Here lay two great roads, not so much for travellers, that
were few, as for armies that were too many by half. These two roads, one of
which was the great high road between France and Germany, _decussated_ at
this very point; which is a learned way of saying that they formed a St.
Andrew's cross, or letter X. I hope the compositor will choose a good large
X, in which case the point of intersection, the _locus_ of conflux for
these four diverging arms, will finish the reader's geographical education,
by showing him to a hair's breadth where it was that Domrémy stood. These
roads, so grandly situated, as great trunk arteries between two mighty
realms,[4] and haunted for ever by wars or rumors of wars, decussated (for
anything I know to the contrary) absolutely under Joanna's bed-room window;
one rolling away to the right, past Monsieur D'Arc's old barn, and the
other unaccountably preferring (but there's no disputing about tastes) to
sweep round that odious man's odious pigstye to the left.

Things being situated as is here laid down, viz. in respect of the
decussation, and in respect of Joanna's bed-room; it follows that, if she
had dropped her glove by accident from her chamber window into the very
bull's eye of the target, in the centre of X, not one of several great
potentates could (though all animated by the sincerest desires for the
peace of Europe) have possibly come to any clear understanding on the
question of whom the glove was meant for. Whence the candid reader
perceives at once the necessity for at least four bloody wars. Falling
indeed a little farther, as, for instance, into the pigstye, the glove
could not have furnished to the most peppery prince any shadow of excuse
for arming: he would not have had a leg to stand upon in taking such a
perverse line of conduct. But, if it fell (as by the hypothesis it did)
into the one sole point of ground common to four kings, it is clear that,
instead of no leg to stand upon, eight separate legs would have had
no ground to stand upon unless by treading on each other's toes. The
philosopher, therefore, sees clearly the necessity of a war, and regrets
that sometimes nations do not wait for grounds of war so solid.

In the circumstances supposed, though the four kings might be unable to
see their way clearly without the help of gunpowder to any decision upon
Joanna's intention, she--poor thing!--never could mistake her intentions
for a moment. All her love was for France; and, therefore, any glove
she might drop into the _quadrivium_ must be wickedly missent by the
post-office, if it found its way to any king but the king of France.

On whatever side of the border chance had thrown Joanna, the same love to
France would have been nurtured. For it is a strange fact, noticed by M.
Michelet and others, that the Dukes of Bar and Lorraine had for generations
pursued the policy of eternal warfare with France on their own account, yet
also of eternal amity and league with France in case anybody else presumed
to attack her. Let peace settle upon France, and before long you might rely
upon seeing the little vixen Lorraine flying at the throat of France. Let
Franco be assailed by a formidable enemy, and instantly you saw a Duke of
Lorraine or Bar insisting on having his throat cut in support of France;
which favor accordingly was cheerfully granted to them in three great
successive battles by the English and by the Turkish sultan, viz., at
Crécy, at Nicopolis, and at Agincourt.

This sympathy with France during great eclipses, in those that during
ordinary seasons were always teasing her with brawls and guerilla inroads,
strengthened the natural piety to France of those that were confessedly
the children of her own house. The outposts of France, as one may call the
great frontier provinces, were of all localities the most devoted to the
Flours de Lys. To witness, at any great crisis, the generous devotion to
these lilies of the little fiery cousin that in gentler weather was for
ever tilting at her breast, could not bin fan the zeal of the legitimate
daughter: whilst to occupy a post of honor on the frontiers against an old
hereditary enemy of France, would naturally have stimulated this zeal by a
sentiment of martial pride, had there even been no other stimulant to zeal
by a sense of danger always threatening, and of hatred always smouldering.
That great four-headed road was a perpetual memento to patriotic ardor.
To say, this way lies the road to Paris--and that other way to
Aix-la-Chapelle, this to Prague, that to Vienna--nourished the warfare of
the heart by daily ministrations of sense. The eye that watched for the
gleams of lance or helmet from the hostile frontier, the ear that listened
for the groaning of wheels, made the high road itself, with its relations
to centres so remote, into a manual of patriotic enmity.

The situation, therefore, _locally_ of Joanna was full of profound
suggestions to a heart that listened for the stealthy steps of change and
fear that too surely were in motion. But if the place were grand, the
times, the burthen of the times, was far more so. The air overhead in its
upper chambers were _hurtling_ with the obscure sound; was dark with sullen
fermenting of storms that had been gathering for a hundred and thirty
years. The battle of Agincourt in Joanna's childhood had re-opened the
wounds of France. Crécy and Poictiers, those withering overthrows for the
chivalry of France, had been tranquillized by more than half a century; but
this resurrection of their trumpet wails made the whole series of battles
and endless skirmishes take their stations as parts in one drama. The
graves that had closed sixty years ago, seemed to fly open in sympathy
with a sorrow that echoed their own. The monarchy of France labored in
extremity, rocked and reeled like a ship fighting with the darkness of
monsoons. The madness of the poor king (Charles VI.) falling in at such a
crisis, like the case of women laboring in childbirth during the storming
of a city, trebled the awfulness of the time. Even the wild story of
the incident which had immediately occasioned the explosion of this
madness--the case of a man unknown, gloomy, and perhaps maniacal himself,
coming out of a forest at noon-day, laying his hand upon the bridle of
the king's horse, checking him for a moment to say, "Oh, King, thou art
betrayed," and then vanishing no man knew whither, as he had appeared for
no man knew what--fell in with the universal prostration of mind that laid
France on her knees as before the slow unweaving of some ancient prophetic
doom. The famines, the extraordinary diseases, the insurrections of the
peasantry up and down Europe, these were chords struck from the same
mysterious harp; but these were transitory chords. There had been others
of deeper and more sonorous sound. The termination of the Crusades, the
destruction of the Templars, the Papal interdicts, the tragedies caused or
suffered by the House of Anjou, by the Emperor--these were full of a more
permanent significance; but since then the colossal figure of feudalism was
seen standing as it were on tiptoe at Crécy for flight from earth: that was
a revolution unparalleled; yet _that_ was a trifle by comparison with the
more fearful revolutions that were mining below the Church. By her own
internal schisms, by the abominable spectacle of a double Pope--so that no
man, except through political bias, could even guess which was Heaven's
vicegerent, and which the creature of hell--she was already rehearsing, as
in still earlier forms she had rehearsed, the first rent in her foundations
(reserved for the coming century) which no man should ever heal.

These were the loftiest peaks of the cloudland in the skies, that to the
scientific gazer first caught the colors of the _new_ morning in advance.
But the whole vast range alike of sweeping glooms overhead, dwelt upon all
meditative minds, even those that could not distinguish the altitudes nor
decipher the forms. It was, therefore, not her own age alone, as affected
by its immediate calamities, that lay with such weight upon Joanna's mind;
but her own age, as one section in a vast mysterious drama, unweaving
through a century back, and drawing nearer continually to crisis after
crisis. Cataracts and rapids were heard roaring ahead; and signs were seen
far back, by help of old men's memories, which answered secretly to signs
now coming forward on the eye, even as locks answer to keys. It was not
wonderful that in such a haunted solitude, with such a haunted heart,
Joanna should see angelic visions, and hear angelic voices. These voices
whispered to her the duty imposed upon herself, of delivering France. Five
years she listened to these monitory voices with internal struggles. At
length she could resist no longer. Doubt gave way; and she left her home in
order to present herself at the Dauphin's court.

The education of this poor girl was mean according to the present standard:
was ineffably grand, according to a purer philosophic standard; and only
not good for our age, because for us it would be unattainable. She read
nothing, for she could not read; but she had heard others read parts of the
Roman martyrology. She wept in sympathy with the sad _Misereres_ of the
Romish chaunting; she rose to heaven with the glad triumphant _Gloria in
Excelcis_: she drew her comfort and her vital strength from the rites of
her church. But, next after these spiritual advantages, she owed most to
the advantages of her situation. The fountain of Domrémy was on the brink
of a boundless forest; and it was haunted to that degree by fairies that
the parish priest (_curé_) was obliged to read mass there once a year, in
order to keep them in any decent bounds. Fairies are important, even in a
statistical view; certain weeds mark poverty in the soil, fairies mark
its solitude. As surely as the wolf retires before cities, does the fairy
sequester herself from the haunts of licensed victuallers. A village is too
much for her nervous delicacy: at most, she can tolerate a distant view
of a hamlet. We may judge, therefore, by the uneasiness and extra trouble
which they gave to the parson, in what strength the fairies mustered at
Domrémy, and, by a satisfactory consequence, how thinly sown with men and
women must have been that region even in its inhabited spots. But the
forests of Domrémy--those were the glories of the land: for, in them abode
mysterious powers and ancient secrets that towered into tragic strength.
"Abbeys there were, and abbey windows, dim and dimly seen--as Moorish
temples of the Hindoos," that exercised even princely power both in
Lorraine and in the German Diets. These had their sweet bells that pierced
the forests for many a league at matins or vespers, and each its own dreamy
legend. Few enough, and scattered enough, were these abbeys, in no degree
to disturb the deep solitude of the region; many enough to spread a network
or awning of Christian sanctity over what else might have seemed a heathen
wilderness. This sort of religious talisman being secured, a man the most
afraid of ghosts (like myself, suppose, or the reader) becomes armed into
courage to wander for days in their sylvan recesses. The mountains of the
Vosges on the eastern frontier of France, have never attracted much notice
from Europe, except in 1813-14, for a few brief months, when they fell
within Napoleon's line of defence against the Allies. But they are
interesting for this, amongst other features--that they do not, like some
loftier ranges, repel woods: the forests and they are on sociable terms.
_Live and let live_ is their motto. For this reason, in part, these tracts
in Lorraine were a favorite hunting ground with the Carlovingian princes.
About six hundred years before Joanna's childhood, Charlemagne was known to
have hunted there. That, of itself, was a grand incident in the traditions
of a forest or a chase. In these vast forests, also, were to be found (if
the race was not extinct) those mysterious fawns that tempted solitary
hunters into visionary and perilous pursuits. Here was seen, at intervals,
that ancient stag who was already nine hundred years old, at the least, but
possibly a hundred or two more, when met by Charlemagne; and the thing
was put beyond doubt by the inscription upon his golden collar. I believe
Charlemagne knighted the stag; and, if ever he is met again by a king, he
ought to be made an earl--or, being upon the marches of France, a marquess.
Observe, I don't absolutely vouch for all these things: my own opinion
varies. On a fine breezy forenoon I am audaciously sceptical; but as
twilight sets in, my credulity becomes equal to anything that could be
desired. And I have heard candid sportsmen declare that, outside of these
very forests near the Vosges, they laughed loudly at all the dim tales
connected with their haunted solitudes; but, on reaching a spot notoriously
eighteen miles deep within them, they agreed with Sir Roger de Coverley
that a good deal might be said on both sides.

Such traditions, or any others that (like the stag) connect distant
generations with each other, are, for that cause, sublime; and the sense of
the shadowy, connected with such appearances that reveal themselves or not
according to circumstances, leaves a coloring of sanctity over ancient
forests, even in those minds that utterly reject the legend as a fact.

But, apart from all distinct stories of that order, in any solitary
frontier between two great empires, as here, for instance, or in the desert
between Syria and the Euphrates, there is an inevitable tendency, in minds
of any deep sensibility to people the solitudes with phantom images of
powers that were of old so vast. Joanna, therefore, in her quiet occupation
of a shepherdess, would be led continually to brood over the political
condition of her country, by the traditions of the past no less than by the
mementoes of the local present.

M. Michelet, indeed, says that La Pucelle was _not_ a shepherdess. I beg
his pardon: she _was_. What he rests upon, I guess pretty well: it is
the evidence of a woman called Haumette, the most confidential friend of
Joanna. Now, she is a good witness, and a good girl, and I like her; for
she makes a natural and affectionate report of Joanna's ordinary life. But
still, however good she may be as a witness, Joanna is better; and
she, when speaking to the Dauphin, calls herself in the Latin report
_Bergereta_. Even Haumette confesses that Joanna tended sheep in her
girlhood. And I believe, that, if Miss Haumette were taking coffee alone
with me this very evening (February 12, 1847)--in which there would be
no subject for scandal or for maiden blushes, because I am an intense
philosopher, and Miss H. would be hard upon four hundred and fifty years
old--she would admit the following comment upon her evidence to be right. A
Frenchman, about thirty years ago, M. Simond, in his _Travels_, mentioned
incidentally the following hideous scene as one steadily observed and
watched by himself in France at a period some trifle before the French
Revolution:--A peasant was ploughing; and the team that drew his plough was
a donkey and a woman. Both were regularly harnessed: both pulled alike.
This is bad enough: but the Frenchman adds, that, in distributing his
lashes, the peasant was obviously desirous of being impartial: or, if
either of the yoke-fellows had a right to complain, certainly it was not
the donkey. Now, in any country, where such degradation of females could be
tolerated by the state of manners, a woman of delicacy would shrink from
acknowledging, either for herself or her friend, that she had ever been
addicted to any mode of labor not strictly domestic; because, if once
owning herself a prædial servant, she would be sensible that this
confession extended by probability in the hearer's thoughts to having
incurred indignities of this horrible kind. Haumette clearly thinks it more
dignified for Joanna to have been darning the stockings of her horny-hoofed
father, Monsieur D'Arc, than keeping sheep, lest she might then be
suspected of having ever done something worse. But, luckily, there was no
danger of _that_: Joanna never was in service; and my opinion is that her
father should have mended his own stockings, since probably he was the
party to make the holes in them, as many a better man than D'Arc does;
meaning by _that_ not myself, because, though certainly a better man than
D'Arc, I protest against doing anything of the kind. If I lived even with
Friday in Juan Fernandez, either Friday must do all the darning, or else it
must go undone. The better men that I meant were the sailors in the British
navy, every man of whom mends his own stockings. Who else is to do it?
Do you suppose, reader, that the junior lords of the admiralty are under
articles to darn for the navy?

The reason, meantime, for my systematic hatred of D'Arc is this. There was
a story current in France before the Revolution, framed to ridicule the
pauper aristocracy, who happened to have long pedigrees and short rent
rolls, viz., that a head of such a house, dating from the Crusades, was
overheard saying to his son, a Chevalier of St. Louis, "_Chevalier, as-tu
donné au cochon à manger_!" Now, it is clearly made out by the surviving
evidence, that D'Arc would much have preferred continuing to say--"_Ma
fille as-tu donné au cochon à manger_?" to saying "_Pucelle d'Orléans,
as-tu sauvé les fleurs-de-lys_?" There is an old English copy of verses
which argues thus:--

  "If the man, that turnips cries,
  Cry not when his father dies--
  Then 'tis plain the man had rather
  Have a turnip than his father."

I cannot say that the logic of these verses was ever _entirely_ to my
satisfaction. I do not see my way through it as clearly as could be wished.
But I see my way most clearly through D'Arc; and the result is--that he
would greatly have preferred not merely a turnip to his father, but the
saving a pound or so of bacon to saving the Oriflamme of France.

It is probable (as M. Michelet suggests) that the title of Virgin, or
_Pucelle_, had in itself, and apart from the miraculous stones about her,
a secret power over the rude soldiery and partisan chiefs of that period;
for, in such a person, they saw a representative manifestation of the
Virgin Mary, who, in a course of centuries, had grown steadily upon the
popular heart.

As to Joanna's supernatural detection of the Dauphin (Charles VII.) amongst
three hundred lords and knights. I am surprised at the credulity which
could ever lend itself to that theatrical juggle. Who admires more than
myself the sublime enthusiasm, the rapturous faith in herself, of this pure
creature? But I admire not stage artifices, which not _La Pucelle_, but the
Court, must have arranged; nor can surrender myself a dupe to a conjuror's
_leger-de-main_, such as may be seen every day for a shilling. Southey's
"Joan of Arc" was published in 1796. Twenty years after, talking with
Southey, I was surprised to find him still owning a secret bias in favor of
Joan, founded on her detection of the Dauphin. The story, for the benefit
of the reader new to the case, was this:--_La Pucelle_ was first made known
to the Dauphin, and presented to his court, at Chinon: and here came her
first trial. She was to find out the royal personage amongst the whole ark
of clean and unclean creatures. Failing in this _coup d'essai_, she would
not simply disappoint many a beating heart in the glittering crowd that on
different motives yearned for her success, but she would ruin herself--and,
as the oracle within had told her, would ruin France. Our own sovereign
lady Victoria rehearses annually a trial not so severe in degree, but the
same in kind. She "pricks" for sheriffs. Joanna pricked for a king. But
observe the difference: our own lady pricks for two men out of three;
Joanna for one man out of three hundred. Happy Lady of the islands and the
orient!--she _can_ go astray in her choice only by one half; to the extent
of one half she _must_ have the satisfaction of being right. And yet, even
with these tight limits to the misery of a boundless discretion, permit me,
liege Lady, with all loyalty, to submit--that now and then you prick with
your pin the wrong man. But the poor child from Domrémy, shrinking under
the gaze of a dazzling court--not because dazzling (for in visions she had
seen those that were more so,) but because some of them wore a scoffing
smile on their features--how should _she_ throw her line into so deep a
river to angle for a king, where many a gay creature was sporting that
masqueraded as kings in dress? Nay, even more than any true king would have
done: for, in Southey's version of the story, the Dauphin says, by way of
trying the virgin's magnetic sympathy with royalty,

  ----"on the throne,
  I the while mingling with the menial throng,
  Some courtier shall he seated."

This usurper is even crowned: "the jeweled crown shines on a menial's
head." But really, that is "_un peu fort_;" and the mob of spectators might
raise a scruple whether our friend the jackdaw upon the throne, and the
Dauphin himself, were not grazing the shins of treason. For the Dauphin
could not lend more than belonged to him. According to the popular notion,
he had no crown for himself, but, at most, a _petit ecu_, worth thirty
pence; consequently none to lend, on any pretence whatever, until the
consecrated Maid should take him to Rheims. This was the _popular_ notion
in France. The same notion as to the indispensableness of a coronation
prevails widely in England. But, certainly, it was the Dauphin's interest
to support the popular notion, as he meant to use the services of Joanna.
For, if he were king already, what was it that she could do for him beyond
Orleans? And above all, if he were king without a coronation, and without
the oil from the sacred ampulla, what advantage was yet open to him by
celerity above his competitor the English boy? Now was to be a race for a
coronation: he that should win _that_ race, carried the superstition of
France along with him. Trouble us not, lawyer, with your quillets. We are
illegal blockheads; so thoroughly without law, that we don't know even if
we have a right to be blockheads; and our mind is made up--that the first
man drawn from the oven of coronation at Rheims, is the man that is baked
into a king. All others are counterfeits, made of base Indian meal, damaged
by sea-water.

La Pucelle, before she could be allowed to practise as a warrior, was put
through her manual and platoon exercise, as a juvenile pupil in divinity,
before six eminent men in wigs. According to Southey (v. 393, Book III., in
the original edition of his "Joan of Arc") she "appall'd the doctors." It's
not easy to do _that_: but they had some reason to feel bothered, as that
surgeon would assuredly feel bothered, who, upon proceeding to dissect a
subject, should find the subject retaliating as a dissector upon himself,
especially if Joanna ever made the speech to them which occupies v.
354-391, B. III. It is a double impossibility; 1st, because a piracy from
Tindal's _Christianity as Old as the Creation:_ now a piracy _à parte post_
is common enough; but a piracy _à parte ante_, and by three centuries,
would (according to our old English phrase) drive a coach-and-six
through any copyright act that man born of woman could frame. 2dly, it is
quite contrary to the evidence on Joanna's trial; for Southey's "Joan" of
A. Dom. 1796 (Cottle, Bristol), tells the doctors, amongst other secrets,
that she never in her life attended--1st, Mass; nor 2d, the Sacramental
table; nor 3d, Confession. Here's a precious windfall for the doctors;
they, by snaky tortuosities, had hoped, through the aid of a corkscrew,
(which every D. D. or S.T.P. is said to carry in his pocket,) for the
happiness of ultimately extracting from Joanna a few grains of heretical
powder or small shot, which might have justified their singeing her a
little. And just at such a crisis, expressly to justify their burning her
to a cinder, up gallops Joanna with a brigade of guns, unlimbers, and
serves them out with heretical grape and deistical round-shot enough to lay
a kingdom under interdict. Any miracles, to which Joanna might treat the
grim D. Ds. after _that_, would go to the wrong side of her little account
in the clerical books. Joanna would be created a _Dr_. herself, but not of
Divinity. For in the Joanna page of the ledger the entry would be--"Miss
Joanna, in acct. with the Church, _Dr._ by sundry diabolic miracles, she
having publicly preached heresy, shown herself a witch, and even tried hard
to corrupt the principles of six church pillars." In the mean time, all
this deistical confession of Joanna's, besides being suicidal for the
interest of her cause, is opposed to the depositions upon _both_ trials.
The very best witness called from first to last deposes that Joanna
attended these rites of her Church even too often; was taxed with doing so;
and, by blushing, owned the charge as a fact, though certainly not as a
fault. Joanna was a girl of natural piety, that saw God in forests,
and hills, and fountains; but did not the less seek him in chapels and
consecrated oratories.

This peasant girl was self-educated through her own natural meditativeness.
If the reader turns to that divine passage in _Paradise Regained_, which
Milton has put into the mouth of our Saviour when first entering the
wilderness, and musing upon the tendency of those great impulses growing
within himself--

  "Oh, what a multitude of thoughts arise!" &c.

he will have some notion of the vast reveries which brooded over the heart
of Joanna in early girlhood, when the wings were budding that should carry
her from Orleans to Rheims; when the golden chariot was dimly revealing
itself that should carry her from the kingdom of _France Delivered_ to the
eternal kingdom.

It is not requisite, for the honor of Joanna, nor is there, in this place,
room to pursue her brief career of _action_. That, though wonderful, forms
the earthly part of her story: the intellectual part is, the saintly
passion of her imprisonment, trial, and execution. It is unfortunate,
therefore, for Southey's "Joan of Arc," (which however should always be
regarded as a _juvenile_ effort,) that, precisely when her real glory
begins, the poem ends. But this limitation of the interest grew, no doubt,
from the constraint inseparably attached to the law of epic unity. Joanna's
history bisects into two opposite hemispheres, and both could not have been
presented to the eye in one poem, unless by sacrificing all unity of theme,
or else by involving the earlier half, as a narrative episode, in the
latter;--this might have been done--it might have been communicated to a
fellow-prisoner, or a confessor, by Joanna herself, in the same way that
Virgil has contrived to acquaint the reader, through the hero's mouth, with
earlier adventures that, if told by the poet speaking in his own person,
would have destroyed the unity of his fable. The romantic interest of the
early and _irrelate_ incidents (last night of Troy, &c.) is thrown as an
affluent into the general river of the personal narrative, whilst yet the
capital current of the _epos_, as unfolding ihe origin and _incunabula_ of
Rome, is not for a moment suffered to be modified by events so subordinate
and so obliquely introduced. It is sufficient, as concerns _this_ section
of Joanna's life to say--that she fulfilled, to the height of her promises,
the restoration of the prostrate throne. France had become a province of
England; and for the ruin of both, if such a yoke could be maintained.
Dreadful pecuniary exhaustion caused the English energy to droop; and
that critical opening _La Pucelle_ used with a corresponding felicity
of audacity and suddenness (that were in themselves portentous) for
introducing the wedge of French native resources, for rekindling the
national pride, and for planting the Dauphin once more upon his feet. When
Joanna appeared, he had been on the point of giving up the struggle with
the English, distressed as they were, and of flying to the south of France.
She taught him to blush for such abject counsels. She liberated Orleans,
that great city, so decisive by its fate for the issue of the war, and then
beleaguered by the English with an elaborate application of engineering
skill unprecedented in Europe. Entering the city after sunset, on the 29th
of April, she sang mass on Sunday, May 8, for the entire disappearance of
the besieging force. On the 29th of June, she fought and gained over the
English the decisive battle of Patay; on the 9th of July, she took Troyes
by a coup-de-main from a mixed garrison of English and Burgundians; on the
15th of that month, she carried the Dauphin into Rheims; on Sunday the
17th, she crowned him; and there she rested from her labor of triumph. What
remained was--to suffer.

All this forward movement was her own: excepting one man, the whole council
was against her. Her enemies were all that drew power from earth. Her
supporters were her own strong enthusiasm, and the headlong contagion
by which she carried this sublime frenzy into the hearts of women, of
soldiers, and of all who lived by labor. Henceforwards she was thwarted;
and the worst error, that she committed, was to lend the sanction of her
presence to counsels which she disapproved. But she had accomplished the
capital objects which her own visions had dictated. These involved all the
rest. Errors were now less important; and doubtless it had now become more
difficult for herself to pronounce authentically what _were_ errors. The
noble girl had achieved, as by a rapture of motion, the capital end of
clearing out a free space around her sovereign, giving him the power to
move his arms with effect; and, secondly, the inappreciable end of winning
for that sovereign what seemed to all France the heavenly ratification of
his rights, by crowning him with the ancient solemnities. She had made it
impossible for the English now to step before her. They were caught in an
irretrievable blunder, owing partly to discord amongst the uncles of Henry
VI., partly to a want of funds, but partly to the very impossibility which
they believed to press with tenfold force upon any French attempt to
forestall theirs. They laughed at such a thought; and whilst they laughed,
she _did_ it. Henceforth the single redress for the English of this capital
oversight, but which never _could_ have redressed it effectually, was--to
vitiate and taint the coronation of Charles VII. as the work of a witch.
That policy, and not malice, (as M. Michelet is so happy to believe,) was
the moving principle in the subsequent prosecution of Joanna. Unless
they unhinged the force of the first coronation in the popular mind, by
associating it with power given from hell, they felt that the sceptre of
the invader was broken.

But she, the child that, at nineteen, had wrought wonders so great for
France, was she not elated? Did she not lose, as men so often _have_ lost,
all sobriety of mind when standing upon the pinnaclè of successes so giddy?
Let her enemies declare. During the progress of her movement, and in
the centre of ferocious struggles, she had manifested the temper of her
feelings by the pity which she had every where expressed for the suffering
enemy. She forwarded to the English leaders a touching invitation to unite
with the French, as brothers, in a common crusade against infidels, thus
opening the road for a soldierly retreat. She interposed to protect
the captive or the wounded--she mourned over the excesses of her
countrymen--she threw herself off her horse to kneel by the dying English
soldier, and to comfort him with such ministrations, physical or spiritual,
as his situation allowed. "Nolebat," says the evidence, "uti onso suo, aut
quemquam interficere." She sheltered the English, that invoked her aid, in
her own quarters. She wept as she beheld, stretched on the field of battle,
so many brave enemies that had died without confession. And, as regarded
herself, her elation expressed itself thus:--on the day when she had
finished her work, she wept; for she knew that, when her task was done, her
end must be approaching. Her aspirations pointed only to a place, which
seemed to her more than usually full of natural piety, as one in which it
would give her pleasure to die. And she uttered, between smiles and tears,
as a wish that inexpressibly fascinated her heart, and yet was half
fantastic, a broken prayer that God would return her to the solitudes from
which he had drawn her, and suffer her to become a shepherdess once more.
It was a natural prayer, because nature has laid a necessity upon every
human heart to seek for rest, and to shrink from torment. Yet, again, it
was a half-fantastic prayer, because, from childhood upwards, visions that
she had no power to mistrust, and the voices which sounded in her ear for
ever, had long since persuaded her mind, that for _her_ no such prayer
could be granted. Too well she felt that her mission must be worked out to
the end, and that the end was now at hand. All went wrong from this time.
She herself had created the _funds_ out of which the French restoration
should grow; but she was not suffered to witness their development, or
their prosperous application. More than one military plan was entered upon
which she did not approve. But she still continued to expose her person
as before. Severe wounds had not taught her caution. And at length, in a
sortie from Compeigne, whether through treacherous collusion on the part
of her own friends is doubtful to this day, she was made prisoner by the
Burgundians, and finally surrendered to the English.

Now came her trial. This trial, moving of course under English influence,
was conducted in chief by the Bishop of Beauvais. He was a Frenchman, sold
to English interests, and hoping, by favor of the English leaders, to
reach the highest preferment. _Bishop that art, Archbishop that shalt be,
Cardinal that mayest be_, were the words that sounded continually in his
ear; and doubtless, a whisper of visions still higher, of a triple crown,
and feet upon the necks of kings, sometimes stole into his heart. M.
Michelet is anxious to keep us in mind that this Bishop was but an agent
of the English. True. But it does not better the case for his countryman;
that, being an accomplice in the crime, making himself the leader in the
persecution against the helpless girl, he was willing to be all this in
the spirit, and with the conscious vileness of a catspaw. Never from the
foundations of the earth was there such a trial as this, if it were laid
open in all its beauty of defence, and all its hellishness of attack. Oh,
child of France! shepherdess, peasant girl! trodden under foot by all
around thee, how I honor thy flashing intellect, quick as God's lightning,
and true as that lightning to its mark, that ran before France and laggard
Europe by many a century, confounding the malice of the ensnarer, and
making dumb the oracles of falsehood! Is it not scandalous, is it not
humiliating to civilization, that, even at this day, France exhibits the
horrid spectacle of judges examining the prisoner against himself; seducing
him, by fraud, into treacherous conclusions against his own head; using the
terrors of their power for extorting confessions from the frailty of hope;
nay, (which is worse,) using the blandishments of condescension and snaky
kindness for thawing into compliances of gratitude those whom they had
failed to freeze into terror? Wicked judges! Barbarian jurisprudence! that,
sitting in your own conceit on the summits of social wisdom, have yet
failed to learn the first principles of criminal justice; sit ye humbly and
with docility at the feet of this girl from Domrémy, that tore your webs of
cruelty into shreds and dust, "Would you examine me as a witness against
myself?" was the question by which many times she defied their arts.
Continually she showed that their interrogations were irrelevant to any
business before the court, or that entered into the ridiculous charges
against her. General questions were proposed to her on points of
casuistical divinity; two-edged questions which not one of themselves could
have answered without, on the one side, landing himself in heresy (as
then interpreted), or, on the other, in some presumptuous expression of
self-esteem. Next came a wretched Dominican that pressed her with an
objection, which, if applied to the Bible, would tax every one of its
miracles with unsoundness. The monk had the excuse of never having read the
Bible. M. Michelet has no such excuse; and it makes one blush for him, as a
philosopher, to find him describing such an argument as "weighty," whereas
it is but a varied expression of rude Mahometan metaphysics. Her answer
to this, if there were room to place the whole in a clear light, was as
shattering as it was rapid. Another thought to entrap her by asking what
language the angelic visitors of her solitude had talked: as though
heavenly counsels could want polyglott interpreters for every word, or that
God needed language at all in whispering thoughts to a human heart. Then
came a worse devil, who asked her whether the archangel Michael had
appeared naked. Not comprehending the vile insinuation, Joanna, whose
poverty suggested to her simplicity that it might be the _costliness_ or
suitable robes which caused the demur, asked them if they fancied God,
who clothed the flowers of the valleys, unable to find raiment for his
servants. The answer of Joanna moves a smile of tenderness, but the
disappointment of her judges makes one laugh horribly. Others succeeded
by troops, who upbraided her with leaving her father; as if that greater
Father, whom she believed herself to have been serving, did not retain the
power of dispensing with his own rules, or had not said, that, for a less
cause than martyrdom, man and woman should leave both father and mother.

On Easter Sunday, when the trial had been long proceeding, the poor girl
fell so ill as to cause a belief that she had been poisoned. It was not
poison. Nobody had any interest in hastening a death so certain. M.
Michelet, whose sympathies with all feelings are so quick that one would
gladly see them always as justly directed, reads the case most truly.
Joanna had a two-fold malady. She was visited by a paroxysm of the
complaint called _home-sickness_; the cruel nature of her imprisonment, and
its length, could not but point her solitary thoughts, in darkness, and in
chains, (for chained she was,) to Domrémy. And the season, which was the
most heavenly period of the spring, added stings to this yearning. That
was one of her maladies--_nostalgia_, as medicine calls it; the other was
weariness and exhaustion from daily combats with malice. She saw that
everybody hated her, and thirsted for her blood; nay, many kind-hearted
creatures that would have pitied her profoundly as regarded all political
charges, had their natural feelings warped by the belief that she had
dealings with fiendish powers. She knew she was to die; that was _not_ the
misery; the misery was that this consummation could not be reached without
so much intermediate strife, as if she were contending for some chance
(where chance was none) of happiness, or were dreaming for a moment of
escaping the inevitable. Why, then, _did_ she contend? Knowing that she
would reap nothing from answering her persecutors, why did she not retire
by silence from the superfluous contest? It was because her quick and eager
loyalty to truth would not suffer her to see it darkened by frauds, which
_she_ could expose, but others, even of candid listeners, perhaps, could
not; it was through that imperishable grandeur of soul, which taught her
to submit meekly and without a struggle to her punishment, but taught
her _not_ to submit--no, not for a moment--to calumny as to facts, or to
misconstruction as to motives. Besides, there were secretaries all around
the court taking down her words. That was meant for no good to _her_. But
the end does not always correspond to the meaning. And Joanna might say to
herself--these words that will be used against me to-morrow and the next
day, perhaps in some nobler generation may rise again for my justification.
Yes, Joanna, they _are_ rising even now in Paris, and for more than
justification.

Woman, sister--there are some things which you do not execute as well as
your brother, man; no, nor ever will. Pardon me if I doubt whether you will
ever produce a great poet from your choirs, or a Mozart, or a Phidias, or a
Michael Angelo, or a great philosopher, or a great scholar. By which last
is meant--not one who depends simply on an infinite memory, but also on an
infinite and electrical power of combination; bringing together from the
four winds, like the angel of the resurrection, what else were dust from
dead men's bones, into the unity of breathing life. If you _can_ create
yourselves into any of these great creators, why have you not? Do not ask
me to say otherwise; because if you do, you will lead me into temptation.
For I swore early in life never to utter a falsehood, and, above all, a
sycophantic falsehood; and, in the false homage of the modern press towards
women, there is horrible sycophancy. It is as hollow, most of it, and it is
as fleeting as is the love that lurks in _uxoriousness_. Yet, if a woman
asks me to tell a faleshood, I have long made up my mind--that on moral
considerations I _will_, and _ought_ to do so, whether it be for any
purpose of glory to _her_, or of screening her foibles (for she _does_
commit a few), or of humbly, as a vassal, paying a peppercorn rent to her
august privilege of caprice. Barring these cases, I must adhere to my
resolution of telling no fibs. And I repeat, therefore, but not to be rude,
I repeat in Latin--

  Excudent alii meliús spirantia signa,
  Credo equidem vivos ducent de marmore vultus:
  Altius ascendent: at tu caput, Eva, memento
  Sandalo ut infringas referenti oracula tanta.

Yet, sister woman--though I cannot consent to find a Mozart or a Michael
Angelo in your sex, until that day when you claim my promise as to
falsehood--cheerfully, and with the love that burns in depths of
admiration, I acknowledge that you can do one thing as well as the best of
us men--a greater thing than even Mozart is known to have done, or Michael
Angelo--you can die grandly, and as goddesses would die were goddesses
mortal. If any distant world (which _may_ be the case) are so far ahead
of us Tellurians in optical resources as to see distinctly through their
telescopes all that we do on earth, what is the grandest sight to which we
ever treat them? St. Peter's at Rome, do you fancy, on Easter Sunday, or
Luxor, or perhaps the Himalayas? Pooh! pooh! my friend: suggest something
better; these are baubles to _them_; they see in other worlds, in their
own, far better toys of the same kind. These, take my word for it, are
nothing. Do you give it up? The finest thing, then, we have to show them
is a scaffold on the morning of execution. I assure you there is a strong
muster in those fair telescopic worlds, on any such morning, of those who
happen to find themselves occupying the right hemisphere for a peep
at _us_. Telescopes look up in the market on that morning, and bear a
monstrous premium; for they cheat, probably, in those scientific worlds as
well as we do. How, then, if it be announced in some such telescopic world
by those who make a livelihood of catching glimpses at our newspapers,
whose language they have long since deciphered, that the poor victim in the
morning's sacrifice is a woman? How, if it be published on that distant
world that the sufferer wears upon her head, in the eyes of many, the
garlands of martyrdom? How, if it should be some Marie Antoinette, the
widowed queen, coming forward on the scaffold, and presenting to the
morning air her head, turned gray prematurely by sorrow, daughter of Cæsars
kneeling down humbly to kiss the guillotine, as one that worships death?
How, if it were the "martyred wife of Roland," uttering impassioned
truth--truth odious to the rulers of her country--with her expiring breath?
How, if it were the noble Charlotte Corday, that in the bloom of youth,
that with the loveliest of persons, that with homage waiting upon her
smiles wherever she turned her face to scatter them--homage that followed
those smiles as surely as the carols of birds, after showers in spring,
follow the re-appearing sun and the racing of sunbeams over the hills--yet
thought all these things cheaper than the dust upon her sandals in
comparison of deliverance from hell for her dear suffering France? Ah!
these were spectacles indeed for those sympathizing people in distant
worlds; and some, perhaps, would suffer a sort of martyrdom themselves,
because they could not testify their wrath, could not bear witness to the
strength of love, and to the fury of hatred, that burned within them at
such scenes; could not gather into golden urns some of that glorious dust
which rested in the catacombs of earth.

On the Wednesday after Trinity Sunday in 1431, being then about nineteen
years of age, the Maid of Arc underwent her martyrdom. She was conducted
before mid-day, guarded by eight hundred spearmen, to a platform of
prodigious height, constructed of wooden billets supported by occasional
walls of lath and plaster, and traversed by hollow spaces in every
direction for the creation of air-currents. The pile "struck terror," says
M. Michelet, "by its height;" and, as usual, the English purpose in this is
viewed as one of pure malignity. But there are two ways of explaining all
that. It is probable that the purpose was merciful. On the circumstances of
the execution I shall not linger. Yet, to mark the almost fatal felicity
of M. Michelet in finding out whatever may injure the English name, at
a moment when every reader will be interested in Joanna's personal
appearance, it is really edifying to notice the ingenuity by which he draws
into light from a dark corner a very unjust account of it, and neglects,
though lying upon the high road, a very pleasing one. Both are from English
pens. Grafton, a chronicler but little read, being a stiff-necked John
Bull, thought fit to say, that no wonder Joanna should be a virgin, since
her "foule face" was a satisfactory solution of that particular merit.
Holinshead, on the other hand, a chronicler somewhat later, every way more
important, and universally read, has given a very pleasing testimony to the
interesting character of Joanna's person and engaging manners. Neither
of these men lived till the following century, so that personally this
evidence is none at all. Grafton sullenly and carelessly believed as
he wished to believe; Holinshead took pains to inquire, and reports
undoubtedly the general impression of France. But I cite the case as
illustrating M. Michelet's candor.

The circumstantial incidents of the execution, unless with more space
than I can now command, I should be unwilling to relate. I should fear
to injure, by imperfect report, a martyrdom which to myself appears so
unspeakably grand. Yet for a purpose pointing, not at Joanna but at M.
Michelet,--viz., to convince him that an Englishman is capable of thinking
more highly of _La Pucelle_ than even her admiring countryman, I shall, in
parting, allude to one or two traits in Joanna's demeanor on the scaffold,
and to one or two in that of the bystanders, which authorize me in
questioning an opinion of his upon this martyr's firmness. The reader ought
to be reminded that Joanna d'Arc was subjected to an unusually unfair trial
of opinion. Any of the elder Christian martyrs had not much to fear of
_personal_ rancor. The martyr was chiefly regarded as the enemy of Cæsar;
at times, also, where any knowledge of the Christian faith and morals
existed, with the enmity that arises spontaneously in the worldly against
the spiritual. But the martyr, though disloyal, was not supposed to be,
therefore, anti-national; and still less was _individually_ hateful. What
was hated (if anything) belonged to his class, not to himself separately.
Now Joanna, if hated at all, was hated personally, and in Rouen on national
grounds. Hence there would be a certainty of calumny arising against _her_,
such as would not affect martyrs in general. That being the case, it would
follow of necessity that some people would impute to her a willingness to
recant. No innocence could escape _that_. Now, had she really testified
this willingness on the scaffold, it would have argued nothing at all but
the weakness of a genial nature shrinking from the instant approach of
torment. And those will often pity that weakness most, who, in their own
persons, would yield to it least. Meantime, there never was a calumny
uttered that drew less support from the recorded circumstances. It rests
upon no _positive_ testimony, and it has a weight of contradicting
testimony to stem. And yet, strange to say, M. Michelet, who at times seems
to admire the Maid of Arc as much as I do, is the one sole writer amongst
her _friends_ who lends some countenance to this odious slander. His words
are, that, if she did not utter this word _recant_ with her lips, she
uttered it in her heart. "Whether, she _said_ the word is uncertain: but I
affirm that she _thought_ it."

Now, I affirm that she did not; not in any sense of the word "_thought_"
applicable to the case. Here is France calumniating _La Pucelle_: here
is England defending her. M. Michelet can only mean, that, on _a priori_
principles, every woman must be presumed liable to such a weakness; that
Joanna was a woman; _ergo_, that she was liable to such a weakness. That
is, he only supposes her to have uttered the word by an argument which
presumes it impossible for anybody to have done otherwise. I, on the
contrary, throw the _onus_ of the argument not on presumable tendencies of
nature, but on the known facts of that morning's execution, as recorded
by multitudes. What else, I demand, than mere weight of metal, absolute
nobility of deportment, broke the vast line of battle then arrayed against
her? What else but her meek, saintly demeanor, won from the enemies, that
till now had believed her a witch, tears of rapturous admiration? "Ten
thousand men," says M. Michelet himself, "ten thousand men wept;" and of
these ten thousand the majority were political enemies knitted together by
cords of superstition. What else was it but her constancy, united with her
angelic gentleness, that drove the fanatic English soldier--who had sworn
to throw a faggot on her scaffold, as _his_ tribute of abhorrence, that
_did_ so, that fulfilled his vow--suddenly to turn away a penitent for
life, saying everywhere that he had seen a dove rising upon wings to heaven
from the ashes where she had stood? What else drove the executioner to
kneel at every shrine for pardon to _his_ share in the tragedy? And, if all
this were insufficient, then I cite the closing act of her life as valid
on her behalf, were all other testimonies against her. The executioner had
been directed to apply his torch from below. He did so. The fiery smoke
rose upwards in billowing volumes. A Dominican monk was then standing
almost at her side. Wrapt up in his sublime office, he saw not the danger,
but still persisted in his prayers. Even then, when the last enemy was
racing up the fiery stairs to seize her, even at that moment did this
noblest of girls think only for _him_, the one friend that would not
forsake her, and not for herself; bidding him with her last breath to care
for his own preservation, but to leave _her_ to God. That girl, whose
latest breath ascended in this sublime expression of self-oblivion, did not
utter the word _recant_ either with her lips or in her heart. No; she did
not, though one should rise from the dead to swear it.

Bishop of Beauvais! thy victim died in fire upon a scaffold--thou upon a
down bed. But for the departing minutes of life, both are oftentimes alike.
At the farewell crisis, when the gates of death are opening, and flesh is
resting from its struggles, oftentimes the tortured and the torturer have
the same truce from carnal torment; both sink together into sleep; together
both, sometimes, kindle into dreams. When the mortal mists were gathering
fast upon you two, Bishop and Shepherd girl--when the pavilions of life
were closing up their shadowy curtains about you--let us try, through the
gigantic glooms, to decipher the flying features of your separate visions.

The shepherd girl that had delivered France--she, from her dungeon, she,
from her baiting at the stake, she, from her duel with fire, as she entered
her last dream--saw Domrémy, saw the fountain of Domrémy, saw the pomp of
forests in which her childhood had wandered. That Easter festival, which
man had denied to her languishing heart--that resurrection of spring-time,
which the darkness of dungeons had intercepted from _her_, hungering after
the glorious liberty of forests--were by God given back into her hands, as
jewels that had been stolen from her by robbers. With those, perhaps, (for
the minutes of dreams can stretch into ages,) was given back to her by God
the bliss of childhood. By special privilege, for _her_ might be created,
in this farewell dream, a second childhood, innocent as the first; but not,
like _that_, sad with the gloom of a fearful mission in the rear. This
mission had now been fulfilled. The storm was weathered, the skirts even of
that mighty storm were drawing off. The blood, that she was to reckon for,
had been exacted; the tears, that she was to shed in secret, had been paid
to the last. The hatred to herself in all eyes had been faced steadily, had
been suffered, had been survived. And in her last fight upon the scaffold
she had triumphed gloriously; victoriously she had tasted the stings of
death. For all, except this comfort from her farewell dream, she had
died--died, amidst the tears of ten thousand enemies--died, amidst the
drums and trumpets of armies--died, amidst peals redoubling upon peals,
volleys upon volleys, from the saluting clarions of martyrs.

Bishop of Beauvais! because the guilt-burthened man is in dreams haunted
and waylaid by the most frightful of his crimes, and because upon that
fluctuating mirror--rising (like the mocking mirrors of _mirage_ in Arabian
deserts) from the fens of death--most of all are reflected the sweet
countenances which the man has laid in ruins; therefore I know, Bishop,
that you, also, entering your final dream, saw Domrémy. That fountain,
of which the witnesses spoke so much, showed itself to your eyes in pure
morning dews; but neither dews, nor the holy dawn, could cleanse away the
bright spots of innocent blood upon its surface. By the fountain, Bishop,
you saw a woman seated, that hid her face. But as _you_ draw near, the
woman raises her wasted features. Would Domrémy know them again for the
features of her child? Ah, but _you_ know them, Bishop, well! Oh, mercy!
what a groan was _that_ which the servants, waiting outside the Bishop's
dream at his bedside, heard from his laboring heart, as at this moment he
turned away from the fountain and the woman, seeking rest in the forests
afar off. Yet not so to escape the woman, whom once again he must behold
before he dies. In the forests to which he prays for pity, will he find a
respite? What a tumult, what a gathering of feet is there! In glades, where
only wild deer should run, armies and nations are assembling; towering in
the fluctuating crowd are phantoms that belong to departed hours. There is
the great English Prince, Regent of France. There is my Lord of Winchester,
the princely Cardinal, that died and made no sign. There is the Bishop of
Beauvais, clinging to the shelter of thickets. What building is that which
hands so rapid are raising? Is it a martyr's scaffold? Will they burn the
child of Domrémy a second time? No: it is a tribunal that rises to the
clouds; and two nations stand around it, waiting for a trial. Shall my Lord
of Beauvais sit again upon the judgment-seat, and again number the hours
for the innocent? Ah! no: he is the prisoner at the bar. Already all is
waiting; the mighty audience is gathered, the Court is hurrying to their
seats, the witnesses are arrayed, the trumpets are sounding, the judge
is going to take his place. Oh! but this is sudden. My lord, have you
no counsel? "Counsel I have none: in heaven above, or on earth beneath,
counsellor there is none now that would take a brief from _me_: all are
silent." Is it, indeed, come to this? Alas! the time is short, the tumult
is wondrous, the crowd stretches away into infinity, but yet I will search
in it for somebody to take your brief: I know of somebody that will be your
counsel. Who is this that cometh from Domrémy? Who is she that cometh in
bloody coronation robes from Rheims? Who is she that cometh with blackened
flesh from walking the furnaces of Rouen? This is she, the shepherd girl,
counsellor that had none for herself, whom I choose, Bishop, for yours. She
it is, I engage, that shall take my lord's brief. She it is, Bishop, that
would plead for you: yes, Bishop, SHE--when heaven and earth are silent.

1. Our English literature he admires with some gnashing of teeth. He
pronounces it "fine and sombre," but, I lament to add, "sceptical, Judaic,
Satanic--in a word, Anti-Christian." That Lord Byron should figure as a
member of this diabolical corporation, will not surprise men. It _will_
surprise them to hear that Milton is one of its Satanic leaders. Many are
the generous and eloquent Frenchmen, beside Chateaubriand, who have, in
the course of the last thirty years, nobly suspended their own burning
nationality, in order to render a more rapturous homage at the feet of
Milton; and some of them have raised Milton almost to a level with angelic
natures. Not one of them has thought of looking for him _below_ the earth.
As to Shakspeare, M. Michelet detects in him a most extraordinary mare's
nest. It is this: he does "not recollect to have seen the name of God" in
any part of his works. On reading such words, it is natural to rub one's
eyes, and suspect that all one has ever seen in this world may have been
a pure ocular delusion. In particular, I begin myself to suspect that the
word "_la gloire_" never occurs in any Parisian journal. "The great English
nation," says M. Michelet, "has one immense profound vice," to wit,
"pride." Why, really, that may be true; but we have a neighbor not
absolutely clear of an "immense profound vice," as like ours in color and
shape as cherry to cherry. In short, M. Michelet thinks us, by fits and
starts, admirable, only that we are detestable; and he would adore some of
our authors, were it not that so intensely he could have wished to kick
them.

2. M. Michelet thinks to lodge an arrow in our sides by a very odd remark
upon Thomas à Kempis: which is, that a man of any conceivable European
blood--a Finlander, suppose, or a Zantiote--might have written Tom; only
not an Englishman. Whether an Englishman could have forged Tom, must remain
a matter of doubt, unless the thing had been tried long ago. That problem
was intercepted for ever by Tom's perverseness in choosing to manufacture
himself. Yet, since nobody is better aware than M. Michelet, that this very
point of Kempis _having_ manufactured Kempis is furiously and hopelessly
litigated, three or four nations claiming to have forged his work for him,
the shocking old doubt will raise its snaky head once more--whether this
forger, who rests in so much darkness, might not, after all, be of English
blood. Tom, it may be feared, is known to modern English literature chiefly
by an irreverent mention of his name in a line of Peter Pindar's (Dr.
Wolcot) fifty years back, where he is described as

  "Kempis Tom,
  Who clearly shows the way to Kingdom Come."

Few in these days can have read him, unless in the Methodist version of
John Wesley. Amongst those few, however, happens to be myself; which arose
from the accident of having, when a boy of eleven, received a copy of the
_De Imitatione Christi_, as a bequest from a relation, who died very young;
from which cause, and from the external prettiness of the book, being a
Glasgow reprint, by the celebrated Foulis, and gaily bound, I was induced
to look into it; and finally read it many times over, partly out of
some sympathy which, even in those days, I had with its simplicity and
devotional fervor; but much more from the savage delight I found in
laughing at Tom's Latinity. _That_, I freely grant to M. Michelet, is
inimitable; else, as regards substance, it strikes me that I could forge a
better _De Imitatione_ myself. But there is no knowing till one tries. Yet,
after all, it is not certain whether the original _was_ Latin. But, however
_that_ may have been, if it is possible that M. Michelet[A] can be accurate
in saying that there are no less than _sixty_ French versions (not
editions, observe, but separate versions) existing of the _De Imitatione_,
how prodigious must have been the adaptation of the book to the religious
heart of the fifteenth century! Excepting the Bible, but excepting
that only in Protestant lands, no book known to man has had the same
distinction. It is the most marvellous bibliographical fact on record.

3. Our English girls, it seems, are as faulty in one way as we English
males in another. None of us lads could have written the _Opera Omnia_ of
Mr. à Kempis; neither could any of our lasses have assumed male attire like
_La Pucelle_. But why? Because, says Michelet, English girls and German
think so much of an indecorum. Well, that is a good fault, generally
speaking. But M. Michelet ought to have remembered a fact in the
martyrologies which justifies both parties,--the French heroine for doing,
and the general choir of English girls for _not_ doing. A female saint,
specially renowned in France, had, for a reason as weighty as Joanna's,
viz., expressly to shield her modesty amongst men, wore a male military
harness. That reason and that example authorized _La Pucelle_; but our
English girls, as a body, have seldom any such reason, and certainly no
such saintly example, to plead. This excuses _them_. Yet, still, if it is
indispensable to the national character that our young women should now and
then trespass over the frontier of decorum, it then becomes a patriotic
duty in me to assure M. Michelet that we have such ardent females amongst
us, and in a long series--some detected in naval hospitals, when too sick
to remember their disguise; some on fields of battle; multitudes never
detected at all; some only suspected; and others discharged without noise
by war offices and other absurd people. In our navy, both royal and
commercial, and generally from deep remembrances of slighted love, women
have sometimes served in disguise for many years, taking contentedly their
daily allowance of burgoo, biscuit, or cannon balls--anything, in short,
digestible or indigestible, that it might please Providence to send. One
thing, at least, is to their credit: never any of these poor masks, with
their deep silent remembrances, have been detected through murmuring, or
what is nautically understood by "skulking." So, for once, M. Michelet has
an _erratum_ to enter upon the fly-leaf of his book in presentation copies.

4. But the last of these ebullitions is the most lively. We English, at
Orleans, and after Orleans (which is not quite so extraordinary, if all
were told,) fled before the Maid of Arc. Yes, says M. Michelet, you _did_:
deny it, if you can. Deny it, my dear? I don't mean to deny it. Running
away, in many cases, is a thing so excellent, that no philosopher would,
at times, condescend to adopt any other step. All of us nations in Europe,
without one exception, have shown our philosophy in that way at times. Even
people, "_qui ne se rendent pas_," have deigned both to run and to shout,
"_Sauve qui pent_" at odd times of sunset; though, for my part, I have
no pleasure in recalling unpleasant remembrances to brave men; and yet,
really, being so philosophic, they ought _not_ to be unpleasant. But
the amusing feature in M. Michelet's reproach, is the way in which he
_improves_ and varies against us the charge of running, as if he were
singing a catch. Listen to him. They "_showed their backs_," did these
English. (Hip, hip, hurrah! three times three!) "_Behind good walls, they
let themselves be taken,_" (Hip, hip! nine times nine!) They "_ran as
fast as their legs could carry them._" (Hurrah! twenty-seven times
twenty-seven!) They "_ran before a girl_;" they did. (Hurrah! eighty-one
times eighty-one!) This reminds one of criminal indictments on the old
model in English courts, where (for fear the prisoner should escape) the
crown lawyer varied the charge perhaps through forty counts. The law laid
its guns so as to rake the accused at every possible angle. Whilst the
indictment was reading, he seemed a monster of crime in his own eyes; and
yet, after all, the poor fellow had but committed one offence, and not
always _that_. N.B.--Not having the French original at hand, I make my
quotations from a friend's copy of Mr. Walter Kelly's translation, which
seems to me faithful, spirited, and idiomatically English--liable, in fact,
only to the single reproach of occasional provincialisms.

Some twenty or more years before I matriculated at Oxford, Mr. Palmer,
M.P. for Bath, had accomplished two things, very hard to do on our little
planet, the Earth, however cheap they may happen to be held by the
eccentric people in comets: he had invented mail-coaches, and he had
married the daughter[1] of a duke. He was, therefore, just twice as great a
man as Galileo, who certainly invented (or _discovered_) the satellites of
Jupiter, those very next things extant to mail-coaches in the two capital
points of speed and keeping time, but who did _not_ marry the daughter of a
duke.

These mail-coaches, as organized by Mr. Palmer, are entitled to a
circumstantial notice from myself--having had so large a share in
developing the anarchies of my subsequent dreams, an agency which they
accomplished, first, through velocity, at that time unprecedented; they
first revealed the glory of motion: suggesting, at the same time, an
under-sense, not unpleasurable, of possible though indefinite danger;
secondly, through grand effects for the eye between lamp-light and the
darkness upon solitary roads; thirdly, through animal beauty and power so
often displayed in the class of horses selected for this mail service;
fourthly, through the conscious presence of a central intellect, that, in
the midst of vast distances,[2] of storms, of darkness, of night, overruled
all obstacles into one steady coöperation in a national result. To my own
feeling, this post-office service recalled some mighty orchestra, where a
thousand instruments, all disregarding each other, and so far in danger of
discord, yet all obedient as slaves to the supreme _baton_ of some great
leader, terminate in a perfection of harmony like that of heart, veins, and
arteries, in a healthy animal organization. But, finally, that particular
element in this whole combination which most impressed myself, and through
which it is that to this hour Mr. Palmer's mail-coach system tyrannizes
by terror and terrific beauty over my dreams, lay in the awful political
mission which at that time it fulfilled. The mail-coaches it was that
distributed over the face of the land, like the opening of apocalyptic
vials, the heart-shaking news of Trafalgar, of Salamanca, of Vittoria, of
Waterloo. These were the harvests that, in the grandeur of their reaping,
redeemed the tears and blood in which they had been sown. Neither was the
meanest peasant so much below the grandeur and the sorrow of the times as
to confound these battles, which were gradually moulding the destinies
of Christendom, with the vulgar conflicts of ordinary warfare, which are
oftentimes but gladiatorial trials of national prowess. The victories of
England in this stupendous contest rose of themselves as natural _Te Deums_
to heaven; and it was felt by the thoughtful that such victories, at such a
crisis of general prostration, were not more beneficial to ourselves than
finally to France, and to the nations of western and central Europe,
through whose pusillanimity it was that the French domination had
prospered.

The mail-coach, as the national organ for publishing these mighty events,
became itself a spiritualized and glorified object to an impassioned heart;
and naturally, in the Oxford of that day, all hearts were awakened. There
were, perhaps, of us gownsmen, two thousand _resident_[3] in Oxford, and
dispersed through five-and-twenty colleges. In some of these the custom
permitted the student to keep what are called "short terms;" that is, the
four terms of Michaelmas, Lent, Easter, and Act, were kept severally by a
residence, in the aggregate, of ninety-one days, or thirteen weeks. Under
this interrupted residence, accordingly, it was possible that a student
might have a reason for going down to his home four times in the year. This
made eight journeys to and fro. And as these homes lay dispersed through
all the shires of the island, and most of us disdained all coaches except
his majesty's mail, no city out of London could pretend to so extensive a
connection with Mr. Palmer's establishment as Oxford. Naturally, therefore,
it became a point of some interest with us, whose journeys revolved every
six weeks on an average, to look a little into the executive details of
the system. With some of these Mr. Palmer had no concern; they rested upon
bye-laws not unreasonable, enacted by posting-houses for their own benefit,
and upon others equally stern, enacted by the inside passengers for the
illustration of their own exclusiveness. These last were of a nature to
rouse our scorn, from which the transition was not _very long_ to mutiny.
Up to this time, it had been the fixed assumption of the four inside
people, (as an old tradition of all public carriages from the reign
of Charles II.,) that they, the illustrious quaternion, constituted
a porcelain variety of the human race, whose dignity would have been
compromised by exchanging one word of civility with the three miserable
delf ware outsides. Even to have kicked an outsider might have been held to
attaint the foot concerned in that operation; so that, perhaps, it would
have required an act of parliament to restore its purity of blood. What
words, then, could express the horror, and the sense of treason, in that
case, which _had_ happened, where all three outsides, the trinity of
Pariahs, made a vain attempt to sit down at the same breakfast table or
dinner table with the consecrated four? I myself witnessed such an attempt;
and on that occasion a benevolent old gentleman endeavored to soothe his
three holy associates, by suggesting that, if the outsides were indicted
for this criminal attempt at the next assizes, the court would regard it as
a case of lunacy (or _delirium tremens_) rather than of treason. England
owes much of her grandeur to the depth of the aristocratic element in her
social composition. I am not the man to laugh at it. But sometimes
it expressed itself in extravagant shapes. The course taken with the
infatuated outsiders, in the particular attempt which I have noticed, was,
that the waiter, beckoning them away from the privileged _salle-à-manger_,
sang out, "This way, my good men;" and then enticed them away off to the
kitchen. But that plan had not always answered. Sometimes, though very
rarely, cases occurred where the intruders, being stronger than usual, or
more vicious than usual, resolutely refused to move, and so far carried
their point, as to have a separate table arranged for themselves in a
corner of the room. Yet, if an Indian screen could be found ample enough
to plant them out from the very eyes of the high table, or _dais_, it then
became possible to assume as a fiction of law--that the three delf fellows,
after all, were not present. They could be ignored by the porcelain men,
under the maxim, that objects not appearing, and not existing, are governed
by the same logical construction.

Such now being, at that time, the usages of mail-coaches, what was to be
done by us of young Oxford? We, the most aristocratic of people, who were
addicted to the practice of looking down superciliously even upon the
insides themselves as often very suspicious characters, were we voluntarily
to court indignities? If our dress and bearing sheltered us, generally,
from the suspicion of being "raff," (the name at that period for
"snobs,") we really _were_ such constructively, by the place we assumed.
If we did not submit to the deep shadow of eclipse, we entered at least the
skirts of its penumbra. And the analogy of theatres was urged against us,
where no man can complain of the annoyances incident to the pit or gallery,
having his instant remedy in paying the higher price of the boxes. But
the soundness of this analogy we disputed. In the case of the theatre,
it cannot be pretended that the inferior situations have any separate
attractions, unless the pit suits the purpose of the dramatic reporter. But
the reporter or critic is a rarity. For most people, the sole benefit is in
the price. Whereas, on the contrary, the outside of the mail had its own
incommunicable advantages. These we could not forego. The higher price we
should willingly have paid, but that was connected with the condition of
riding inside, which was insufferable. The air, the freedom of prospect,
the proximity to the horses, the elevation of seat--these were what we
desired; but, above all, the certain anticipation of purchasing occasional
opportunities of driving.

Under coercion of this great practical difficulty, we instituted a
searching inquiry into the true quality and valuation of the different
apartments about the mail. We conducted this inquiry on metaphysical
principles; and it was ascertained satisfactorily, that the roof of the
coach, which some had affected to call the attics, and some the garrets,
was really the drawing-room, and the box was the chief ottoman or sofa
in that drawing-room; whilst it appeared that the inside, which had been
traditionally regarded as the only room tenantable by gentlemen, was, in
fact, the coal-cellar in disguise.

Great wits jump. The very same idea had not long before struck the
celestial intellect of China. Amongst the presents carried out by our first
embassy to that country was a state-coach. It had been specially selected
as a personal gift by George III.; but the exact mode of using it was a
mystery to Pekin. The ambassador, indeed, (Lord Macartney,) had made some
dim and imperfect explanations upon the point; but as his excellency
communicated these in a diplomatic whisper, at the very moment of his
departure, the celestial mind was very feebly illuminated; and it became
necessary to call a cabinet council on the grand state question--"Where was
the emperor to sit?" The hammer-cloth happened to be unusually gorgeous;
and partly on that consideration, but partly also because the box offered
the most elevated seat, and undeniably went foremost, it was resolved by
acclamation that the box was the imperial place, and, _for the scoundrel
who drove, he might sit where he could find a perch_. The horses,
therefore, being harnessed, under a flourish of music and a salute of guns,
solemnly his imperial majesty ascended his new English throne, having the
first lord of the treasury on his right hand, and the chief jester on his
left. Pekin gloried in the spectacle; and in the whole flowery people,
constructively present by representation, there was but one discontented
person, which was the coachman. This mutinous individual, looking as
blackhearted as he really was, audaciously shouted, "Where am _I_ to sit?"
But the privy council, incensed by his disloyalty, unanimously opened the
door, and kicked him into the inside. He had all the inside places
to himself; but such is the rapacity of ambition, that he was still
dissatisfied. "I say," he cried out in an extempore petition, addressed to
the emperor through the window, "how am I to catch hold of the reins?" "Any
how," was the answer; "don't trouble _me_, man, in my glory; through the
windows, through the key-holes--how you please." Finally this contumacious
coachman lengthened the checkstrings into a sort of jury-reins,
communicating with the horses; with these he drove as steadily as may be
supposed. The emperor returned after the briefest of circuits; he descended
in great pomp from his throne, with the severest resolution never to
remount it. A public thanksgiving was ordered for his majesty's prosperous
escape from the disease of a broken neck; and the state-coach was dedicated
for ever as a votive offering to the god Fo, Fo--whom the learned more
accurately called Fi, Fi.

A revolution of this same Chinese character did young Oxford of that era
effect in the constitution of mail-coach society. It was a perfect French
revolution; and we had good reason to say, _Ca ira_. In fact, it soon
became _too_ popular. The "public," a well known character, particularly
disagreeable, though slightly respectable, and notorious for affecting the
chief seats in synagogues, had at first loudly opposed this revolution;
but when the opposition showed itself to be ineffectual, our disagreeable
friend went into it with headlong zeal. At first it was a sort of race
between us; and, as the public is usually above thirty, (say generally from
thirty to fifty years old,) naturally we of young Oxford, that averaged
about twenty, had the advantage. Then the public took to bribing, giving
fees to horse-keepers, &c., who hired out their persons as warming-pans on
the box-seat. _That_, you know, was shocking to our moral sensibilities.
Come to bribery, we observed, and there is an end to all morality,
Aristotle's, Cicero's, or anybody's. And, besides, of what use was it?
For _we_ bribed also. And as our bribes to those of the public being
demonstrated out of Euclid to be as five shillings to sixpence, here
again young Oxford had the advantage. But the contest was ruinous to
the principles of the stable establishment about the mails. The whole
corporation was constantly bribed, rebribed, and often sur-rebribed; so
that a horse-keeper, ostler, or helper, was held by the philosophical at
that time to be the most corrupt character in the nation.

There was an impression upon the public mind, natural enough from the
continually augmenting velocity of the mail, but quite erroneous, that
an outside seat on this class of carriages was a post of danger. On the
contrary, I maintained that, if a man had become nervous from some
gipsey prediction in his childhood, allocating to a particular moon now
approaching some unknown danger, and he should inquire earnestly, "Whither
can I go for shelter? Is a prison the safest retreat? Or a lunatic
hospital? Or the British Museum?" I should have replied, "Oh, no; I'll tell
you what to do. Take lodgings for the next forty days on the box of his
majesty's mail. Nobody can touch you there. If it is by bills at ninety
days after date that you are made unhappy--if noters and protesters are the
sort of wretches whose astrological shadows darken the house of life--then
note you what I vehemently protest, viz., that no matter though the sheriff
in every county should be running after you with his _posse_, touch a hair
of your head he cannot whilst you keep house, and have your legal domicile
on the box of the mail. It's felony to stop the mail; even the sheriff
cannot do that. And an _extra_ (no great matter if it grazes the sheriff)
touch of the whip to the leaders at any time guarantees your safety." In
fact, a bed-room in a quiet house, seems a safe enough retreat; yet it is
liable to its own notorious nuisances, to robbers by night, to rats, to
fire. But the mail laughs at these terrors. To robbers, the answer is
packed up and ready for delivery in the barrel of the guard's blunderbuss.
Rats again! there _are_ none about mail-coaches, any more than snakes in
Van Troil's Iceland; except, indeed, now and then a parliamentary rat, who
always hides his shame in the "coal cellar." And, as to fire, I never knew
but one in a mail-coach, which was in the Exeter mail, and caused by an
obstinate sailor bound to Devonport. Jack, making light of the law and the
lawgiver that had set their faces against his offence, insisted on taking
up a forbidden seat in the rear of the roof, from which he could exchange
his own yarns with those of the guard. No greater offence was then known to
mail-coaches; it was treason, it was _læsa majestas_, it was by tendency
arson; and the ashes of Jack's pipe, falling amongst the straw of the
hinder boot, containing the mail-bags, raised a flame which (aided by the
wind of our motion) threatened a revolution in the republic of letters. But
even this left the sanctity of the box unviolated. In dignified repose,
the coachman and myself sat on, resting with benign composure upon our
knowledge--that the fire would have to burn its way through four inside
passengers before it could reach ourselves. With a quotation rather too
trite, I remarked to the coachman,--

  ----"Jam proximus ardet
  Ucalegon."

But recollecting that the Virgilian part of his education might have been
neglected, I interpreted so far as to say, that perhaps at that moment the
flames were catching hold of our worthy brother and next-door neighbor
Ucalegon. The coachman said nothing, but, by his faint sceptical smile, he
seemed to be thinking that he knew better; for that in fact, Ucalegon, as
it happened, was not in the way-bill.

No dignity is perfect which does not at some point ally itself with the
indeterminate and mysterious. The connection of the mail with the state
and the executive government--a connection obvious, but yet not strictly
defined--gave to the whole mail establishment a grandeur and an official
authority which did us service on the roads, and invested us with
seasonable terrors. But perhaps these terrors were not the less impressive,
because their exact legal limits were imperfectly ascertained. Look at
those turnpike gates; with what deferential hurry, with what an obedient
start, they fly open at our approach! Look at that long line of carts
and carters ahead, audaciously usurping the very crest of the road. Ah!
traitors, they do not hear us as yet; but as soon as the dreadful blast of
our horn reaches them with the proclamation of our approach, see with what
frenzy of trepidation they fly to their horses' heads, and deprecate our
wrath by the precipitation of their crane-neck quarterings. Treason they
feel to be their crime; each individual carter feels himself under the
ban of confiscation and attainder: his blood is attainted through six
generations, and nothing is wanting but the headsman and his axe, the block
and the sawdust, to close up the vista of his horrors. What! shall it be
within benefit of clergy to delay the king's message on the high
road?--to interrupt the great respirations, ebb or flood, of the national
intercourse--to endanger the safety of tidings, running day and night
between all nations and languages? Or can it be fancied, amongst the
weakest of men, that the bodies of the criminals will be given up to their
widows for Christian burial? Now the doubts which were raised as to our
powers did more to wrap them in terror, by wrapping them in uncertainty,
than could have been effected by the sharpest definitions of the law from
the Quarter Sessions. We, on our parts, (we, the collective mail, I mean,)
did our utmost to exalt the idea of our privileges by the insolence with
which we wielded them. Whether this insolence rested upon law that gave
it a sanction, or upon conscious power, haughtily dispensing with that
sanction, equally it spoke from a potential station; and the agent in each
particular insolence of the moment, was viewed reverentially, as one having
authority.

Sometimes after breakfast his majesty's mail would become frisky: and in
its difficult wheelings amongst the intricacies of early markets, it would
upset an apple cart, a cart loaded with eggs, &c. Huge was the affliction
and dismay, awful was the smash, though, after all, I believe the damage
might be levied upon the hundred. I, as far as possible, endeavored in such
a case to represent the conscience and moral sensibilities of the mail;
and, when wildernesses of eggs were lying poached under our horses' hoofs,
then would I stretch forth my hands in sorrow, saying (in words too
celebrated in those days from the false[5] echoes of Marengo)--"Ah!
wherefore have we not time to weep over you?" which was quite impossible,
for in fact we had not even time to laugh over them. Tied to post-office
time, with an allowance in some cases of fifty minutes for eleven miles,
could the royal mail pretend to undertake the offices of sympathy and
condolence? Could it be expected to provide tears for the accidents of the
road? If even it seemed to trample on humanity, it did so, I contended, in
discharge of its own more peremptory duties.

Upholding the morality of the mail, _à fortiori_ I upheld its rights,
I stretched to the uttermost its privilege of imperial precedency, and
astonished weak minds by the feudal powers which I hinted to be lurking
constructively in the charters of this proud establishment. Once I remember
being on the box of the Holyhead mail, between Shrewsbury and Oswestry,
when a tawdry thing from Birmingham, some _Tallyho_ or _Highflier_, all
flaunting with green and gold, came up alongside of us. What a contrast to
our royal simplicity of form and color is this plebeian wretch! The single
ornament on our dark ground of chocolate color was the mighty shield of the
imperial arms, but emblazoned in proportions as modest as a signet-ring
bears to a seal of office. Even this was displayed only on a single panel,
whispering, rather than proclaiming, our relations to the state; whilst the
beast from Birmingham had as much writing and painting on its sprawling
flanks as would have puzzled a decipherer from the tombs of Luxor. For some
time this Birmingham machine ran along by our side--a piece of familiarity
that seemed to us sufficiently jacobinical. But all at once a movement of
the horses announced a desperate intention of leaving us behind. "Do you
see _that_?" I said to the coachman. "I see," was his short answer. He was
awake, yet he waited longer than seemed prudent; for the horses of our
audacious opponent had a disagreeable air of freshness and power. But
his motive was loyal; his wish was that the Birmingham conceit should be
full-blown before he froze it. When _that_ seemed ripe, he unloosed, or, to
speak by a stronger image, he sprang his known resources, he slipped our
royal horses like cheetas, or hunting leopards, after the affrighted game.
How they could retain such a reserve of fiery power after the work they had
accomplished, seemed hard to explain. But on our side, besides the physical
superiority, was a tower of strength, namely, the king's name, "which they
upon the adverse faction wanted." Passing them without an effort, as it
seemed, we threw them into the rear with so lengthening an interval between
us, as proved in itself the bitterest mockery of their presumption; whilst
our guard blew back a shattering blast of triumph, that was really too
painfully full of derision.

I mention this little incident for its connection with what followed. A
Welshman, sitting behind me, asked if I had not felt my heart burn within
me during the continuance of the race? I said--No; because we were not
racing with a mail, so that no glory could be gained. In fact, it was
sufficiently mortifying that such a Birmingham thing should dare to
challenge us. The Welshman replied, that he didn't see _that_; for that a
cat might look at a king, and a Brummagem coach might lawfully race the
Holyhead mail. "_Race_ us perhaps," I replied, "though even _that_ has an
air of sedition, but not _beat_ us. This would have been treason; and for
its own sake I am glad that the Tallyho was disappointed." So dissatisfied
did the Welshman seem with this opinion, that at last I was obliged to tell
him a very fine story from one of our elder dramatists, viz.--that once, in
some oriental region, when the prince of all the land, with his splendid
court, were flying their falcons, a hawk suddenly flew at a majestic eagle;
and in defiance of the eagle's prodigious advantages, in sight also of all
the astonished field sportsmen, spectators, and followers, killed him on
the spot. The prince was struck with amazement at the unequal contest, and
with burning admiration for its unparalleled result. He commanded that the
hawk should be brought before him; caressed the bird with enthusiasm, and
ordered that, for the commemoration of his matchless courage, a crown
of gold should be solemnly placed on the hawk's head; but then that,
immediately after this coronation, the bird should be led off to execution,
as the most valiant indeed of traitors, but not the less a traitor that had
dared to rise in rebellion against his liege lord the eagle. "Now," said I
to the Welshman, "How painful it would have been to you and me as men of
refined feelings, that this poor brute, the Tallyho, in the impossible case
of a victory over us, should have been crowned with jewellery, gold, with
Birmingham ware, or paste diamonds, and then led off to instant execution."
The Welshman doubted if that could be warranted by law. And when I hinted
at the 10th of Edward III., chap. 15, for regulating the precedency of
coaches, as being probably the statute relied on for the capital punishment
of such offences, he replied drily--that if the attempt to pass a mail was
really treasonable, it was a pity that the Tallyho appeared to have so
imperfect an acquaintance with law.

These were among the gaieties of my earliest and boyish acquaintance with
mails. But alike the gayest and the most terrific of my experiences rose
again after years of slumber, armed with preternatural power to shake my
dreaming sensibilities; sometimes, as in the slight case of Miss Fanny on
the Bath road, (which I will immediately mention,) through some casual or
capricious association with images originally gay, yet opening at some
stage of evolution into sudden capacities of horror; sometimes through the
more natural and fixed alliances with the sense of power so various lodged
in the mail system.

The modern modes of travelling cannot compare with the mail-coach system
in grandeur and power. They boast of more velocity, but not however as
a consciousness, but as a fact of our lifeless knowledge, resting upon
_alien_ evidence; as, for instance, because somebody _says_ that we have
gone fifty miles in the hour, or upon the evidence of a result, as that
actually we find ourselves in York four hours after leaving London. Apart
from such an assertion, or such a result, I am little aware of the pace.
But, seated on the old mail-coach, we needed no evidence out of ourselves
to indicate the velocity. On this system the word was--_Non magna
loquimur_, as upon railways, but _magna vivimus_. The vital experience of
the glad animal sensibilities made doubts impossible on the question of our
speed; we heard our speed, we saw it, we felt it as a thrilling; and this
speed was not the product of blind insensate agencies, that had no sympathy
to give, but was incarnated in the fiery eyeballs of an animal, in his
dilated nostril, spasmodic muscles, and echoing hoofs. This speed was
incarnated in the _visible_ contagion amongst brutes of some impulse, that,
radiating into _their_ natures, had yet its centre and beginning in man.
The sensibility of the horse, uttering itself in the maniac light of his
eye, might be the last vibration of such a movement; the glory of Salamanca
might be the first--but the intervening link that connected them, that
spread the earthquake of the battle into the eyeball of the horse, was
the heart of man--kindling in the rapture of the fiery strife, and then
propagating its own tumults by motions and gestures to the sympathies, more
or less dim, in his servant the horse.

But now, on the new system of travelling, iron tubes and boilers have
disconnected man's heart from the ministers of his locomotion. Nile nor
Trafalgar has power any more to raise an extra bubble in a steam-kettle.
The galvanic cycle is broken up for ever: man's imperial nature no longer
sends itself forward through the electric sensibility of the horse; the
inter-agencies are gone in the mode of communication between the horse and
his master, out of which grew so many aspects of sublimity under accidents
of mists that hid, or sudden blazes that revealed, of mobs that agitated,
or midnight solitudes that awed. Tidings, fitted to convulse all nations,
must henceforwards travel by culinary process; and the trumpet that once
announced from afar the laurelled mail, heart-shaking, when heard screaming
on the wind, and advancing through the darkness to every village
or solitary house on its route, has now given way for ever to the
pot-wallopings of the boiler.

Thus have perished multiform openings for sublime effects, for interesting
personal communications, for revelations of impressive faces that could not
have offered themselves amongst the hurried and fluctuating groups of
a railway station. The gatherings of gazers about a mail-coach had one
centre, and acknowledged only one interest. But the crowds attending at
a railway station have as little unity as running water, and own as many
centres as there are separate carriages in the train.

How else, for example, than as a constant watcher for the dawn, and for
the London mail that in summer months entered about dawn into the lawny
thickets of Marlborough Forest, couldst thou, sweet Fanny of the Bath road,
have become known to myself? Yet Fanny, as the loveliest young woman for
face and person that perhaps in my whole life I have beheld, merited
the station which even _her_ I could not willingly have spared; yet
(thirty-five years later) she holds in my dreams: and though, by an
accident of fanciful caprice, she brought along with her into those dreams
a troop of dreadful creatures, fabulous and not fabulous, that were more
abominable to a human heart than Fanny and the dawn were delightful.

Miss Fanny of the Bath road, strictly speaking, lived at a mile's distance
from that road, but came so continually to meet the mail, that I on my
frequent transits rarely missed her, and naturally connected her name
with the great thoroughfare where I saw her; I do not exactly know, but I
believe with some burthen of commissions to be executed in Bath, her own
residence being probably the centre to which these commissions gathered.
The mail coachman, who wore the royal livery, being one amongst the
privileged few,[6] happened to be Fanny's grandfather. A good man he
was, that loved his beautiful granddaughter; and, loving her wisely, was
vigilant over her deportment in any case where young Oxford might happen
to be concerned. Was I then vain enough to imagine that I myself,
individually, could fall within the line of his terrors? Certainly not,
as regarded any physical pretensions that I could plead; for Fanny (as a
chance passenger from her own neighborhood once told me) counted in her
train a hundred and ninety-nine professed admirers, if not open aspirants
to her favor; and probably not one of the whole brigade but excelled myself
in personal advantages. Ulysses even, with the unfair advantage of his
accursed bow, could hardly have undertaken that amount of suitors. So
the danger might have seemed slight--only that woman is universally
aristocratic; it is amongst her nobilities of heart that she _is_ so. Now,
the aristocratic distinctions in my favor might easily with Miss Fanny have
compensated my physical deficiencies. Did I then make love to Fanny? Why,
yes; _mais oui donc_; as much love as one _can_ make whilst the mail is
changing horses, a process which ten years later did not occupy above
eighty seconds; but _then_, viz., about Waterloo, it occupied five times
eighty. Now, four hundred seconds offer a field quite ample enough for
whispering into a young woman's ear a great deal of truth; and (by way of
parenthesis) some trifle of falsehood. Grandpapa did right, therefore, to
watch me. And yet, as happens too often to the grandpapas of earth, in
a contest with the admirers of granddaughters, how vainly would he have
watched me had I meditated any evil whispers to Fanny! She, it is my
belief, would have protected herself against any man's evil suggestions.
But he, as the result showed, could not have intercepted the opportunities
for such suggestions. Yet he was still active; he was still blooming.
Blooming he was as Fanny herself.

  "Say, all our praises why should lords--"

No, that's not the line.

  "Say, all our roses why should girls engross?"

The coachman showed rosy blossoms on his face deeper even than his
granddaughter's,--_his_ being drawn from the ale cask, Fanny's from youth
and innocence, and from the fountains of the dawn. But, in spite of his
blooming face, some infirmities he had; and one particularly (I am very
sure, no _more_ than one,) in which he too much resembled a crocodile. This
lay in a monstrous inaptitude for turning round. The crocodile, I presume,
owes that inaptitude to the absurd _length_ of his back; but in our
grandpapa it arose rather from the absurd _breadth_ of his back, combined,
probably, with some growing stiffness in his legs. Now upon this crocodile
infirmity of his I planted an easy opportunity for tendering my homage to
Miss Fanny. In defiance of all his honorable vigilance, no sooner had he
presented to us his mighty Jovian back (what a field for displaying to
mankind his royal scarlet!) whilst inspecting professionally the buckles,
the straps, and the silver turrets of his harness, than I raised Miss
Fanny's hand to my lips, and, by the mixed tenderness and respectfulness of
my manner, caused her easily to understand how happy it would have made
me to rank upon her list as No. 10 or 12, in which case a few casualties
amongst her lovers (and observe--they _hanged_ liberally in those days)
might have promoted me speedily to the top of the tree; as, on the other
hand, with how much loyalty of submission I acquiesced in her allotment,
supposing that she had seen reason to plant me in the very rearward of her
favor, as No. 199+1. It must not be supposed that I allowed any trace
of jest, or even of playfulness, to mingle with these expressions of my
admiration; that would have been insulting to her, and would have been
false as regarded my own feelings. In fact, the utter shadowyness of our
relations to each other, even after our meetings through seven or eight
years had been very numerous, but of necessity had been very brief, being
entirely on mail-coach allowance--timid, in reality, by the General
Post-Office--and watched by a crocodile belonging to the antepenultimate
generation, left it easy for me to do a thing which few people ever _can_
have done--viz., to make love for seven years, at the same time to be
as sincere as ever creature was, and yet never to compromise myself by
overtures that might have been foolish as regarded my own interests,
or misleading as regarded hers. Most truly I loved this beautiful and
ingenuous girl; and had it not been for the Bath and Bristol mail, heaven
only knows what might have come of it. People talk of being over head and
ears in love--now, the mail was the cause that I sank only over ears in
love, which, you know, still left a trifle of brain to overlook the whole
conduct of the affair. I have mentioned the case at all for the sake of
a dreadful result from it in after years of dreaming. But it seems, _ex
abundanti_, to yield this moral--viz., that as, in England, the idiot and
the half-wit are held to be under the guardianship of chancery, so the man
making love, who is often but a variety of the same imbecile class, ought
to be made a ward of the General Post-Office, whose severe course of
_timing_ and periodical interruption might intercept many a foolish
declaration, such as lays a solid foundation for fifty years' repentance.

Ah, reader! when I look back upon those days, it seems to me that all
things change or perish. Even thunder and lightning, it pains me to say,
are not the thunder and lightning which I seem to remember about the
time of Waterloo. Roses, I fear, are degenerating, and, without a Red
revolution, must come to the dust. The Fannies of our island--though this
I say with reluctance--are not improving; and the Bath road is notoriously
superannuated. Mr. Waterton tells me that the crocodile does _not_
change--that a cayman, in fact, or an alligator, is just as good for riding
upon as he was in the time of the Pharaohs. _That_ may be; but the reason
is, that the crocodile does not live fast--he is a slow coach. I believe
it is generally understood amongst naturalists, that the crocodile is a
blockhead. It is my own impression that the Pharaohs were also blockheads.
Now, as the Pharaohs and the crocodile domineered over Egyptian society,
this accounts for a singular mistake that prevailed on the Nile. The
crocodile made the ridiculous blunder of supposing man to be meant chiefly
for his own eating. Man, taking a different view of the subject, naturally
met that mistake by another; he viewed the crocodile as a thing sometimes
to worship, but always to run away from. And this continued until Mr.
Waterton changed the relations between the animals. The mode of escaping
from the reptile he showed to be, not by running away, but by leaping on
its back, booted and spurred. The two animals had misunderstood each other.
The use of the crocodile has now been cleared up--it is to be ridden; and
the use of man is, that he may improve the health of the crocodile by
riding him a fox-hunting before breakfast. And it is pretty certain that
any crocodile, who has been regularly hunted through the season, and is
master of the weight he carries, will take a six-barred gate now as well as
ever he would have done in the infancy of the pyramids.

Perhaps, therefore, the crocodile does _not_ change, but all things else
_do_: even the shadow of the pyramids grows less. And often the restoration
in vision of Fanny and the Bath road, makes me too pathetically sensible of
that truth. Out of the darkness, if I happen to call up the image of Fanny
from thirty-five years back, arises suddenly a rose in June; or, if I think
for an instant of the rose in June, up rises the heavenly face of Fanny.
One after the other, like the antiphonies in the choral service, rises
Fanny and the rose in June, then back again the rose in June and Fanny.
Then come both together, as in a chorus; roses and Fannies, Fannies and
roses, without end--thick as blossoms in paradise. Then comes a venerable
crocodile, in a royal livery of scarlet and gold, or in a coat with sixteen
capes; and the crocodile is driving four-in-hand from the box of the
Bath mail. And suddenly we upon the mail are pulled up by a mighty dial,
sculptured with the hours, and with the dreadful legend of TOO LATE. Then
all at once we are arrived at Marlborough forest, amongst the lovely
households[7] of the roe-deer: these retire into the dewy thickets; the
thickets are rich with roses; the roses call up (as ever) the sweet
countenance of Fanny, who, being the granddaughter of a crocodile, awakens
a dreadful host of wild semi-legendary animals,--griffins, dragons,
basilisks, sphinxes,--till at length the whole vision of fighting images
crowds into one towering armorial shield, a vast emblazonry of human
charities and human loveliness that have perished, but quartered
heraldically with unutterable horrors of monstrous and demoniac natures,
whilst over all rises, as a surmounting crest, one fair female hand, with
the fore-finger pointing, in sweet, sorrowful admonition, upwards to
heaven, and having power (which, without experience, I never could have
believed) to awaken the pathos that kills in the very bosom of the horrors
that madden the grief that gnaws at the heart, together with the monstrous
creations of darkness that shock the belief, and make dizzy the reason of
man. This is the peculiarity that I wish the reader to notice, as having
first been made known to me for a possibility by this early vision of
Fanny on the Bath road. The peculiarity consisted in the confluence of two
different keys, though apparently repelling each other, into the music
and governing principles of the same dream; horror, such as possesses the
maniac, and yet, by momentary transitions, grief, such as may be supposed
to possess the dying mother when leaving her infant children to the mercies
of the cruel. Usually, and perhaps always, in an unshaken nervous system,
these two modes of misery exclude each other--here first they met in horrid
reconciliation. There was also a separate peculiarity in the quality of the
horror. This was afterwards developed into far more revolting complexities
of misery and incomprehensible darkness; and perhaps I am wrong in
ascribing any value as a _causative_ agency to this particular case on the
Bath road--possibly it furnished merely an _occasion_ that accidentally
introduced a mode of horrors certain, to any rate, to have grown up,
with or without the Bath road, from more advanced stages of the nervous
derangement. Yet, as the cubs of tigers or leopards, when domesticated,
have been observed to suffer a sudden development of their latent ferocity
under too eager an appeal to their playfulness--the gaieties of sport in
_them_ being too closely connected with the fiery brightness of their
murderous instincts--so I have remarked that the caprices, the gay
arabesques, and the lovely floral luxuriations of dreams, betray a shocking
tendency to pass into finer maniacal splendors. That gaiety, for instance
(for such as first it was,) in the dreaming faculty, by which one principal
point of resemblance to a crocodile in the mail-coachman was soon made to
clothe him with the form of a crocodile, and yet was blended with accessory
circumstances derived from his _human_ functions, passed rapidly into a
further development, no longer gay or playful, but terrific, the most
terrific that besieges dreams, viz--the horrid inoculation upon each other
of incompatible natures. This horror has always been secretly felt by
man; it was felt even under pagan forms of religion, which offered a very
feeble, and also a very limited gamut for giving expression to the human
capacities of sublimity or of horror. We read it in the fearful composition
of the sphinx. The dragon, again, is the snake inoculated upon the
scorpion. The basilisk unites the mysterious malice of the evil eye,
unintentional on the part of the unhappy agent, with the intentional venom
of some other malignant natures. But these horrid complexities of evil
agency are but _objectively_ horrid; they inflict the horror suitable to
their compound nature; but there is no insinuation that they _feel_ that
horror. Heraldry is so full of these fantastic creatures, that, in some
zoologies, we find a separate chapter or a supplement dedicated to what is
denominated heraldic zoology. And why not? For these hideous creatures,
however visionary[8], have a real traditionary ground in medieval
belief--sincere and partly reasonable, though adulterating with mendacity,
blundering, credulity, and intense superstition. But the dream-horror
which I speak of is far more frightful. The dreamer finds housed
within himself--occupying, as it were, some separate chamber in his
brain--holding, perhaps, from that station a secret and detestable commerce
with his own heart--some horrid alien nature. What if it were his own
nature repeated,--still, if the duality were distinctly perceptible, even
_that_--even this mere numerical double of his own consciousness--might
be a curse too mighty to be sustained. But how, if the alien nature
contradicts his own, fights with it, perplexes, and confounds it? How,
again, if not one alien nature, but two, but three, but four, but five, are
introduced within what once he thought the inviolable sanctuary of himself?
These, however, are horrors from the kingdoms of anarchy and darkness,
which, by their very intensity, challenge the sanctity of concealment, and
gloomily retire from exposition. Yet it was necessary to mention them,
because the first introduction to such appearances (whether causal,
or merely casual) lay in the heraldic monsters, (which monsters were
themselves introduced though playfully,) by the transfigured coachman of
the Bath mail.

But the grandest chapter of our experience, within the whole mail-coach
service, was on those occasions when we went down from London with the
news of victory. A period of about ten years stretched from Trafalgar to
Waterloo: the second and third years of which period (1806 and 1807)
were comparatively sterile; but the rest, from 1805 to 1815 inclusively,
furnished a long succession of victories; the least of which, in a contest
of that portentous nature, had an inappreciable value of position--partly
for its absolute interference with the plans of our enemy, but still
more from its keeping alive in central Europe the sense of a deep-seated
vulnerability in France. Even to tease the coasts of our enemy, to mortify
them by continual blockades, to insult them by capturing if it were but a
baubling schooner under the eyes of their arrogant armies, repeated from
time to time a sullen proclamation of power lodged in a quarter to which
the hopes of Christendom turned in secret. How much more loudly must this
proclamation have spoken in the audacity[9] of having bearded the _elite_
of their troops, and having beaten them in pitched battles! Five years of
life it was worth paying down for the privilege of an outside place on a
mail-coach, when carrying down the first tidings of any such event. And it
is to be noted that, from our insular situation, and the multitude of our
frigates disposable for the rapid transmission of intelligence, rarely
did any unauthorized rumor steal away a prelibation from the aroma of the
regular dispatches. The government official news was generally the first
news.

From eight, P.M. to fifteen or twenty minutes later, imagine the mails
assembled on parade in Lombard Street, where, at that time, was seated the
General Post-Office. In what exact strength we mustered I do not remember;
but, from the length of each separate _attelage_, we filled the street,
though a long one, and though we were drawn up in double file. On _any_
night the spectacle was beautiful. The absolute perfection of all the
appointments about the carriages and the harness, and the magnificence of
the horses, were what might first have fixed the attention. Every
carriage, on every morning in the year, was taken down to an inspector
for examination--wheels, axles, linch-pins, pole, glasses, &c., were
all critically probed and tested. Every part of every carriage had been
cleaned, every horse had been groomed, with as much rigor as if they
belonged to a private gentleman; and that part of the spectacle offered
itself always. But the night before us is a night of victory; and behold!
to the ordinary display, what a heart-shaking addition!--horses, men,
carriages--all are dressed in laurels and flowers, oak leaves and ribbons.
The guards, who are his majesty's servants, and the coachmen, who are
within the privilege of the post-office, wear the royal liveries of course;
and as it is summer (for all the _land_ victories were won in summer,) they
wear, on this fine evening, these liveries exposed to view, without any
covering of upper coats. Such a costume, and the elaborate arrangement of
the laurels in their hats, dilated their hearts, by giving to them openly
an _official_ connection with the great news, in which already they have
the general interest of patriotism. That great national sentiment surmounts
and quells all sense of ordinary distinctions. Those passengers who happen
to be gentlemen are now hardly to be distinguished as such except by dress.
The usual reserve of their manner in speaking to the attendants has on this
night melted away. One heart, one pride, one glory, connects every man
by the transcendent bond of his English blood. The spectators, who are
numerous beyond precedent, express their sympathy with these fervent
feelings by continual hurrahs. Every moment are shouted aloud by the
post-office servants the great ancestral names of cities known to history
through a thousand years,--Lincoln, Winchester, Portsmouth, Gloucester,
Oxford, Bristol, Manchester, York, Newcastle, Edinburgh, Perth,
Glasgow--expressing the grandeur of the empire by the antiquity of its
towns, and the grandeur of the mail establishment by the diffusive
radiation of its separate missions. Every moment you hear the thunder of
lids locked down upon the mail-bags. That sound to each individual mail is
the signal for drawing off, which process is the finest part of the entire
spectacle. Then come the horses into play,--horses! can these be horses
that (unless powerfully reined in) would bound off with the action and
gestures of leopards? What stir!--what sea-like ferment!--what a thundering
of wheels, what a trampling of horses!--what farewell cheers--what
redoubling peals of brotherly congratulation, connecting the name of the
particular mail--"Liverpool for ever!"--with the name of the particular
victory--"Badajoz for ever!" or "Salamanca for ever!" The half-slumbering
consciousness that, all night long and all the next day--perhaps for even
a longer period--many of these mails, like fire racing along a train of
gunpowder, will be kindling at every instant new successions of burning
joy, has an obscure effect of multiplying the victory itself, by
multiplying to the imagination into infinity the stages of its progressive
diffusion. A fiery arrow seems to be let loose, which from that moment
is destined to travel, almost without intermission, westwards for three
hundred[10] miles--northwards for six hundred; and the sympathy of our
Lombard Street friends at parting is exalted a hundred fold by a sort of
visionary sympathy with the approaching sympathies, yet unborn, which we
are going to evoke.

Liberated from the embarrassments of the city, and issuing into the broad
uncrowded avenues of the northern suburbs, we begin to enter upon our
natural pace of ten miles an hour. In the broad light of the summer
evening, the sun, perhaps, only just at the point of setting, we are
seen from every story of every house. Heads of every age crowd to
the windows--young and old understand the language of our victorious
symbols--and rolling volleys of sympathizing cheers run along behind and
before our course. The beggar, rearing himself against the wall, forgets
his lameness--real or assumed--thinks not of his whining trade, but stands
erect, with bold exulting smiles, as we pass him. The victory has healed
him, and says--Be thou whole! Women and children, from garrets alike and
cellars, look down or look up with loving eyes upon our gay ribbons and our
martial laurels--sometimes kiss their hands, sometimes hang out, as signals
of affection, pocket handkerchiefs, aprons, dusters, anything that lies
ready to their hands. On the London side of Barnet, to which we draw near
within a few minutes after nine, observe that private carriage which is
approaching us. The weather being so warm, the glasses are all down; and
one may read, as on the stage of a theatre, everything that goes on within
the carriage. It contains three ladies, one likely to be "mama," and two
of seventeen or eighteen, who are probably her daughters. What lovely
animation, what beautiful unpremeditated pantomime, explaining to us every
syllable that passes, in these ingenuous girls! By the sudden start and
raising of the hands, on first discovering our laurelled equipage--by the
sudden movement and appeal to the elder lady from both of them--and by the
heightened color on their animated countenances, we can almost hear them
saying--"See, see! Look at their laurels. Oh, mama! there has been a great
battle in Spain; and it has been a great victory." In a moment we are on
the point of passing them. We passengers--I on the box, and the two on the
roof behind me--raise our hats, the coachman makes his professional salute
with the whip; the guard even, though punctilious on the matter of his
dignity as an officer under the crown, touches his hat. The ladies move to
us, in return, with a winning graciousness of gesture: all smile on each
side in a way that nobody could misunderstand, and that nothing short of a
grand national sympathy could so instantaneously prompt. Will these ladies
say that we are nothing to _them_? Oh, no; they will not say _that_. They
cannot deny--they do not deny--that for this night they are our sisters:
gentle or simple, scholar or illiterate servant, for twelve hours to
come--we on the outside have the honor to be their brothers. Those poor
women again, who stop to gaze upon us with delight at the entrance of
Barnet, and seem, by their air of weariness, to be returning from labor--do
you mean to say that they are washerwomen and char-women? Oh, my poor
friend, you are quite mistaken; they are nothing of the kind. I assure you
they stand in a higher rank; for this one night they feel themselves by
birthright to be daughters of England, and answer to no humbler title.

Every joy, however, even rapturous joy--such is the sad law of earth--may
carry with it grief, or fear of grief, to some. Three miles beyond Barnet,
we see approaching us another private carriage, nearly repeating the
circumstances of the former case. Here, also, the glasses are all
down--here, also, is an elderly lady seated; but the two amiable daughters
are missing; for the single young person, sitting by the lady's side, seems
to be an attendant--so I judge from her dress, and her air of respectful
reserve. The lady is in mourning; and her countenance expresses sorrow.
At first she does not look up; so that I believe she is not aware of our
approach, until she hears the measured beating of our horses' hoofs. Then
she raises her eyes to settle them painfully on our triumphal equipage.
Our decorations explain the case to her at once; but she beholds them with
apparent anxiety, or even with terror. Some time before this, I, finding it
difficult to hit a flying mark, when embarrassed by the coachman's person
and reins intervening, had given to the guard a _Courier_ evening paper,
containing the gazette, for the next carriage that might pass. Accordingly
he tossed it in so folded that the huge capitals expressing some such
legend as--GLORIOUS VICTORY, might catch the eye at once. To see the paper,
however, at all, interpreted as it was by our ensigns of triumph, explained
everything; and, if the guard were right in thinking the lady to have
received it with a gesture of horror, it could not be doubtful that she had
suffered some deep personal affliction in connection with this Spanish war.

Here now was the case of one, who, having formerly suffered, might,
erroneously perhaps, be distressing herself with anticipations of another
similar suffering. That same night, and hardly three hours later, occurred
the reverse case. A poor woman, who too probably would find herself, in a
day or two, to have suffered the heaviest of afflictions by the battle,
blindly allowed herself to express an exultation so unmeasured in the
news, and its details, as gave to her the appearance which amongst Celtic
Highlanders is called _fey_. This was at some little town, I forget what,
where we happened to change horses near midnight. Some fair or wake had
kept the people up out of their beds. We saw many lights moving about as
we drew near; and perhaps the most impressive scene on our route was our
reception at this place. The flashing of torches and the beautiful radiance
of blue lights (technically Bengal lights) upon the heads of our horses;
the fine effect of such a showery and ghostly illumination falling upon
flowers and glittering laurels, whilst all around the massy darkness seemed
to invest us with walls of impenetrable blackness, together with the
prodigious enthusiasm of the people, composed a picture at once scenical
and affecting. As we staid for three or four minutes, I alighted. And
immediately from a dismantled stall in the street, where perhaps she had
been presiding at some part of the evening, advanced eagerly a middle-aged
woman. The sight of my newspaper it was that had drawn her attention upon
myself. The victory which we were carrying down to the provinces on _this_
occasion was the imperfect one of Talavera. I told her the main outline of
the battle. But her agitation, though not the agitation of fear, but of
exultation rather, and enthusiasm, had been so conspicuous when listening,
and when first applying for information, that I could not but ask her if
she had not some relation in the Peninsular army. Oh! yes: her only son was
there. In what regiment? He was a trooper in the 23d Dragoons. My heart
sank within me as she made that answer. This sublime regiment, which an
Englishman should never mention without raising his hat to their memory,
had made the most memorable and effective charge recorded in military
annals. They leaped their horses--_over_ a trench where they could, _into_
it, and with the result of death or mutilation when they could _not_. What
proportion cleared the trench is nowhere stated. Those who _did_, closed up
and went down upon the enemy with such divinity of fervor--(I use the
word _divinity_ by design: the inspiration of God must have prompted this
movement to those whom even then he was calling to his presence)--that two
results followed. As regarded the enemy, this 23d Dragoons, not, I believe,
originally three hundred and fifty strong, paralyzed a French column, six
thousand strong, then ascending the hill, and fixed the gaze of the whole
French army. As regarded themselves, the 23d were supposed at first to have
been all but annihilated; but eventually, I believe, not so many as one in
four survived. And this, then, was the regiment--a regiment already for
some hours known to myself and all London, as stretched, by a large
majority, upon one bloody aceldama--in which the young trooper served whose
mother was now talking with myself in a spirit of such hopeful enthusiasm.
Did I tell her the truth? Had I the heart to break up her dreams? No. I
said to myself, to-morrow, or the next day, she will hear the worst. For
this night, wherefore should she not sleep in peace? After to-morrow,
the chances are too many that peace will forsake her pillow. This brief
respite, let her owe this to _my_ gift and _my_ forbearance. But, if I told
her not of the bloody price that had been paid, there was no reason for
suppressing the contributions from her son's regiment to the service and
glory of the day. For the very few words that I had time for speaking, I
governed myself accordingly. I showed her not the funeral banners under
which the noble regiment was sleeping. I lifted not the overshadowing
laurels from the bloody trench in which horse and rider lay mangled
together. But I told her how these dear children of England, privates and
officers, had leaped their horses over all obstacles as gaily as hunters to
the morning's chase. I told her how they rode their horses into the mists
of death, (saying to myself, but not saying to _her_,) and laid down their
young lives for thee, O mother England! as willingly--poured out their
noble blood as cheerfully--as ever, after a long day's sport, when infants,
they had rested their wearied heads upon their mother's knees, or had sunk
to sleep in her arms. It is singular that she seemed to have no fears, even
after this knowledge that the 23d Dragoons had been conspicuously engaged,
for her son's safety: but so much was she enraptured by the knowledge that
_his_ regiment, and therefore _he_, had rendered eminent service in the
trying conflict--a service which had actually made them the foremost topic
of conversation in London--that in the mere simplicity of her fervent
nature, she threw her arms round my neck, and, poor woman, kissed me.

What is to be thought of sudden death? It is remarkable that, in different
conditions of society it has been variously regarded as the consummation of
an earthly career most fervently to be desired, and, on the other hand,
as that consummation which is most of all to be deprecated. Cæsar the
Dictator, at his last dinner party, (_coena_,) and the very evening before
his assassination, being questioned as to the mode of death which, in _his_
opinion, might seem the most eligible, replied--"That which should be most
sudden." On the other hand, the divine Litany of our English Church, when
breathing forth supplications, as if in some representative character for
the whole human race prostrate before God, places such a death in the very
van of horrors. "From lightning and tempest; from plague, pestilence, and
famine; from battle and murder, and from sudden death,--_Good Lord, deliver
us_." Sudden death is here made to crown the climax in a grand ascent of
calamities; it is the last of curses; and yet, by the noblest of Romans,
it was treated as the first of blessings. In that difference, most readers
will see little more than the difference between Christianity and Paganism.
But there I hesitate. The Christian church may be right in its estimate of
sudden death; and it is a natural feeling, though after all it may also
be an infirm one, to wish for a quiet dismissal from life--as that which
_seems_ most reconcilable with meditation, with penitential retrospects,
and with the humilities of farewell prayer. There does not, however, occur
to me any direct scriptural warrant for this earnest petition of the
English Litany. It seems rather a petition indulged to human infirmity,
than exacted from human piety. And, however _that_ may be, two remarks
suggest themselves as prudent restraints upon a doctrine, which else _may_
wander, and _has_ wandered, into an uncharitable superstition. The first
is this: that many people are likely to exaggerate the horror of a sudden
death, (I mean the _objective_ horror to him who contemplates such a
death, not the _subjective_ horror to him who suffers it,) from the false
disposition to lay a stress upon words or acts, simply because by an
accident they have become words or acts. If a man dies, for instance,
by some sudden death when he happens to be intoxicated, such a death is
falsely regarded with peculiar horror; as though the intoxication were
suddenly exalted into a blasphemy. But _that_ is unphilosophic. The man
was, or he was not, _habitually_ a drunkard. If not, if his intoxication
were a solitary accident, there can be no reason at all for allowing
special emphasis to this act, simply because through misfortune it became
his final act. Nor, on the other hand, if it were no accident, but one of
his _habitual_ transgressions, will it be the more habitual or the more a
transgression, because some sudden calamity, surprising him, has caused
this habitual transgression to be also a final one? Could the man have had
any reason even dimly to foresee his own sudden death, there would have
been a new feature in his act of intemperance--a feature of presumption and
irreverence, as in one that by possibility felt himself drawing near to the
presence of God. But this is no part of the case supposed. And the only new
element in the man's act is not any element of extra immorality, but simply
of extra misfortune.

The other remark has reference to the meaning of the word _sudden_. And it
is a strong illustration of the duty which for ever calls us to the stern
valuation of words--that very possibly Cæesar and the Christian church do
not differ in the way supposed; that is, do not differ by any difference
of doctrine as between Pagan and Christian views of the moral temper
appropriate to death, but that they are contemplating different cases.
Both contemplate a violent death; a [Greek: biathanatos]--death that
is [Greek: biaios]: but the difference is--that the Roman by the word
"sudden" means an _unlingering_ death: whereas the Christian Litany
by "sudden" means a death _without warning_, consequently without any
available summons to religious preparation. The poor mutineer, who kneels
down to gather into his heart the bullets from twelve firelocks of his
pitying comrades, dies by a most sudden death in Cæsar's sense: one shock,
one mighty spasm, one (possibly _not_ one) groan, and all is over. But,
in the sense of the Litany, his death is far from sudden; his offence,
originally, his imprisonment, his trial, the interval between his sentence
and its execution, having all furnished him with separate warnings of his
fate--having all summoned him to meet it with solemn preparation.

Meantime, whatever may be thought of a sudden death as a mere variety in
the modes of dying, where death in some shape is inevitable--a question
which, equally in the Roman and the Christian sense, will be variously
answered according to each man's variety of temperament--certainly, upon
one aspect of sudden death there can be no opening for doubt, that of all
agonies incident to man it is the most frightful, that of all martyrdoms it
is the most freezing to human sensibilities--namely, where it surprises a
man under circumstances which offer (or which seem to offer) some hurried
and inappreciable chance of evading it. Any effort, by which such an
evasion can be accomplished, must be as sudden as the danger which it
affronts. Even _that_, even the sickening necessity for hurrying in
extremity where all hurry seems destined to be vain, self-baffled, and
where the dreadful knell of _too_ late is already sounding in the ears by
anticipation--even that anguish is liable to a hideous exasperation in one
particular case, namely, where the agonising appeal is made not exclusively
to the instinct of self-preservation, but to the conscience, on behalf of
another life besides your own, accidentally cast upon _your_ protection. To
fail, to collapse in a service merely your own, might seem comparatively
venial; though, in fact, it is far from venial. But to fail in a case where
Providence has suddenly thrown into your hands the final interests of
another--of a fellow-creature shuddering between the gates of life and
death; this, to a man of apprehensive conscience, would mingle the misery
of an atrocious criminality with the misery of a bloody calamity. The man
is called upon, too probably, to die; but to die at the very moment when,
by any momentary collapse, he is self-denounced as a murderer. He had but
the twinkling of an eye for his effort, and that effort might, at the best,
have been unavailing; but from this shadow of a chance, small or great, how
if he has recoiled by a treasonable _lâcheté_? The effort _might_ have been
without hope; but to have risen to the level of that effort, would have
rescued him, though not from dying, yet from dying as a traitor to his
duties.

The situation here contemplated exposes a dreadful ulcer, lurking far down
in the depths of human nature. It is not that men generally are summoned
to face such awful trials. But potentially, and in shadowy outline, such
a trial is moving subterraneously in perhaps all men's natures--muttering
under ground in one world, to be realized perhaps in some other. Upon the
secret mirror of our dreams such a trial is darkly projected at intervals,
perhaps, to every one of us. That dream, so familiar to childhood, of
meeting a lion, and, from languishing prostration in hope and vital energy,
that constant sequel of lying down before him, publishes the secret
frailty of human nature--reveals its deep-seated Pariah falsehood to
itself--records its abysmal treachery. Perhaps not one of us escapes that
dream; perhaps, as by some sorrowful doom of man, that dream repeats for
every one of us, through every generation, the original temptation in Eden.
Every one of us, in this dream, has a bait offered to the infirm places of
his own individual will; once again a snare is made ready for leading him
into captivity to a luxury of ruin; again, as in aboriginal Paradise, the
man falls from innocence; once again, by infinite iteration, the ancient
Earth groans to God, through her secret caves, over the weakness of her
child; "Nature, from her seat, sighing through all her works," again "gives
signs of woe that all is lost;" and again the counter sigh is repeated to
the sorrowing heavens of the endless rebellion against God. Many people
think that one man, the patriarch of our race, could not in his single
person execute this rebellion for all his race. Perhaps they are wrong.
But, even if not, perhaps in the world of dreams every one of us ratifies
for himself the original act. Our English rite of "Confirmation," by which,
in years of awakened reason, we take upon us the engagements contracted
for us in our slumbering infancy,--how sublime a rite is that! The little
postern gate, through which the baby in its cradle had been silently placed
for a time within the glory of God's countenance, suddenly rises to the
clouds as a triumphal arch, through which, with banners displayed and
martial pomps, we make our second entry as crusading soldiers militant
for God, by personal choice and by sacramental oath. Each man says in
effect--"Lo! I rebaptise myself; and that which once was sworn on my
behalf, now I swear for myself." Even so in dreams, perhaps, under some
secret conflict of the midnight sleeper, lighted up to the consciousness
at the time, but darkened to the memory as soon as all is finished, each
several child of our mysterious race completes for himself the aboriginal
fall.

As I drew near to the Manchester post office, I found that it was
considerably past midnight; but to my great relief, as it was important for
me to be in Westmorland by the morning, I saw by the huge saucer eyes of
the mail, blazing through the gloom of overhanging houses, that my chance
was not yet lost. Past the time it was; but by some luck, very unusual in
my experience, the mail was not even yet ready to start. I ascended to
my seat on the box, where my cloak was still lying as it had lain at
the Bridgewater Arms. I had left it there in imitation of a nautical
discoverer, who leaves a bit of bunting on the shore of his discovery, by
way of warning off the ground the whole human race, and signalising to the
Christian and the heathen worlds, with his best compliments, that he has
planted his throne for ever upon that virgin soil: henceforward claiming
the _jus dominii_ to the top of the atmosphere above it, and also the right
of driving shafts to the centre of the earth below it; so that all people
found after this warning, either aloft in the atmosphere, or in the
shafts, or squatting on the soil, will be treated as trespassers--that is,
decapitated by their very faithful and obedient servant, the owner of the
said bunting. Possibly my cloak might not have been respected, and the _jus
gentium_ might have been cruelly violated in my person--for, in the dark,
people commit deeds of darkness, gas being a great ally of morality--but it
so happened that, on this night, there was no other outside passenger;
and the crime, which else was but too probable, missed fire for want of
a criminal. By the way, I may as well mention at this point, since a
circumstantial accuracy is essential to the effect of my narrative, that
there was no other person of any description whatever about the mail--the
guard, the coachman, and myself being allowed for--except only one--a
horrid creature of the class known to the world as insiders, but whom young
Oxford called sometimes "Trojans," in opposition to our Grecian selves, and
sometimes "vermin." A Turkish Effendi, who piques himself on good breeding,
will never mention by name a pig. Yet it is but too often that he has
reason to mention this animal; since constantly, in the streets of
Stamboul, he has his trousers deranged or polluted by this vile creature
running between his legs. But under any excess of hurry he is always
careful, out of respect to the company he is dining with, to suppress the
odious name, and to call the wretch "that other creature," as though all
animal life beside formed one group, and this odious beast (to whom, as
Chrysippus observed, salt serves as an apology for a soul) formed another
and alien group on the outside of creation. Now I, who am an English
Effendi, that think myself to understand good-breeding as well as any son
of Othman, beg my reader's pardon for having mentioned an insider by his
gross natural name. I shall do so no more; and, if I should have occasion
to glance at so painful a subject, I shall always call him "that other
creature." Let us hope, however, that no such distressing occasion will
arise. But, by the way, an occasion arises at this moment; for the reader
will be sure to ask, when we come to the story, "Was this other creature
present?" He was _not_; or more correctly, perhaps, _it_ was not. We
dropped the creature--or the creature, by natural imbecility, dropped
itself--within the first ten miles from Manchester. In the latter case, I
wish to make a philosophic remark of a moral tendency. When I die, or when
the reader dies, and by repute suppose of fever, it will never be known
whether we died in reality of the fever or of the doctor. But this other
creature, in the case of dropping out of the coach, will enjoy a coroner's
inquest; consequently he will enjoy an epitaph. For I insist upon it, that
the verdict of a coroner's jury makes the best of epitaphs. It is brief, so
that the public all find time to read; it is pithy, so that the surviving
friends (if any _can_ survive such a loss) remember it without fatigue; it
is upon oath, so that rascals and Dr. Johnsons cannot pick holes in it.
"Died through the visitation of intense stupidity, by impinging on a
moonlight night against the off hind wheel of the Glasgow mail! Deodand
upon the said wheel--two-pence." What a simple lapidary inscription! Nobody
much in the wrong but an off-wheel; and with few acquaintances; and if it
were but rendered into choice Latin, though there would be a little bother
in finding a Ciceronian word for "off-wheel," Marcellus himself, that great
master of sepulchral eloquence, could not show a better. Why I call this
little remark _moral_, is, from the compensation it points out. Here, by
the supposition, is that other creature on the one side, the beast of the
world; and he (or it) gets an epitaph. You and I, on the contrary, the
pride of our friends, get none.

But why linger on the subject of vermin? Having mounted the box, I took a
small quantity of laudanum, having already travelled two hundred and fifty
miles--viz., from a point seventy miles beyond London, upon a simple
breakfast. In the taking of laudanum there was nothing extraordinary. But
by accident it drew upon me the special attention of my assessor on the
box, the coachman. And in _that_ there was nothing extraordinary. But by
accident, and with great delight, it drew my attention to the fact that
this coachman was a monster in point of size, and that he had but one eye.
In fact he had been foretold by Virgil as--

  "Monstrum. horrendum, informe, ingens cui lumen adempium."

He answered in every point--a monster he was--dreadful, shapeless, huge,
who had lost an eye. But why should _that_ delight me? Had he been one of
the Calendars in the Arabian Nights, and had paid down his eye as the price
of his criminal curiosity, what right had I to exult in his misfortune? I
did _not_ exult: I delighted in no man's punishment, though it were even
merited. But these personal distinctions identified in an instant an old
friend of mine, whom I had known in the south for some years as the most
masterly of mail-coachmen. He was the man in all Europe that could best
have undertaken to drive six-in-hand full gallop over _Al Sirat_--that
famous bridge of Mahomet across the bottomless gulf, backing himself
against the Prophet and twenty such fellows. I used to call him _Cyclops
mastigophorus_, Cyclops the whip-bearer, until I observed that his skill
made whips useless, except to fetch off an impertinent fly from a leader's
head; upon which I changed his Grecian name to Cyclops _diphrélates_
(Cyclops the charioteer.) I, and others known to me, studied under him the
diphrelatic art. Excuse, reader, a word too elegant to be pedantic. And
also take this remark from me, as a _gage d'amitié_--that no word ever
was or _can_ be pedantic which, by supporting a distinction, supports the
accuracy of logic; or which fills up a chasm for the understanding. As a
pupil, though I paid extra fees, I cannot say that I stood high in
his esteem. It showed his dogged honesty, (though, observe, not his
discernment,) that he could not see my merits. Perhaps we ought to excuse
his absurdity in this particular by remembering his want of an eye. _That_
made him blind to my merits. Irritating as this blindness was, (surely
it could not be envy?) he always courted my conversation, in which art I
certainly had the whip-hand of him. On this occasion, great joy was at our
meeting. But what was Cyclops doing here? Had the medical men recommended
northern air, or how? I collected, from such explanations as he
volunteered, that he had an interest at stake in a suit-at-law pending at
Lancaster; so that probably he had got himself transferred to this station,
for the purpose of connecting with his professional pursuits an instant
readiness for the calls of his lawsuit.

Meantime, what are we stopping for? Surely, we've been waiting long enough.
Oh, this procrastinating mail, and oh this procrastinating post-office!
Can't they take a lesson upon that subject from _me_? Some people have
called _me_ procrastinating. Now you are witness, reader, that I was in
time for _them_. But can _they_ lay their hands on their hearts, and say
that they were in time for me? I, during my life, have often had to wait
for the post-office; the post-office never waited a minute for me. What are
they about? The guard tells me that there is a large extra accumulation of
foreign mails this night, owing to irregularities caused by war and by the
packet service, when as yet nothing is done by steam. For an _extra_ hour,
it seems, the post-office has been engaged in threshing out the pure
wheaten correspondence of Glasgow, and winnowing it from the chaff of all
baser intermediate towns. We can hear the flails going at this moment. But
at last all is finished. Sound your horn, guard. Manchester, good bye;
we've lost an hour by your criminal conduct at the post-office; which,
however, though I do not mean to part with a serviceable ground of
complaint, and one which really is such for the horses, to me secretly is
an advantage, since it compels us to recover this last hour amongst the
next eight or nine. Off we are at last, and at eleven miles an hour; and at
first I detect no changes in the energy or in the skill of Cyclops.

From Manchester to Kendal, which virtually (though not in law) is the
capital of Westmoreland, were at this time seven stages of eleven miles
each. The first five of these, dated from Manchester, terminated in
Lancaster, which was therefore fifty-five miles north of Manchester, and
the same distance exactly from Liverpool. The first three terminated in
Preston, (called, by way of distinction from other towns of that name,
_proud_ Preston,) at which place it was that the separate roads from
Liverpool and from Manchester to the north became confluent. Within these
first three stages lay the foundation, the progress, and termination of our
night's adventure. During the first stage, I found out that Cyclops was
mortal: he was liable to the shocking affection of sleep--a thing which I
had never previously suspected. If a man is addicted to the vicious habit
of sleeping, all the skill in aurigation of Apollo himself, with the horses
of Aurora to execute the motions of his will, avail him nothing. "Oh,
Cyclops!" I exclaimed more than once, "Cyclops, my friend; thou art mortal.
Thou snorest." Through this first eleven miles, however, he betrayed
his infirmity--which I grieve to say he shared with the whole Pagan
Pantheon--only by short stretches. On waking up, he made an apology for
himself, which, instead of mending the matter, laid an ominous foundation
for coming disasters. The summer assizes were now proceeding at Lancaster:
in consequence of which, for three nights and three days, he had not lain
down in a bed. During the day, he was waiting for his uncertain summons as
a witness on the trial in which he was interested; or he was drinking with
the other witnesses, under the vigilant surveillance of the attorneys.
During the night, or that part of it when the least temptations existed to
conviviality, he was driving. Throughout the second stage he grew more and
more drowsy. In the second mile of the third stage, he surrendered himself
finally and without a struggle to his perilous temptation. All his past
resistance had but deepened the weight of this final oppression. Seven
atmospheres of sleep seemed resting upon him; and, to consummate the case,
our worthy guard, after singing "Love amongst the Roses," for the fiftieth
or sixtieth time, without any invitation from Cyclops or myself, and
without applause for his poor labors, had moodily resigned himself to
slumber--not so deep doubtless as the coachman's, but deep enough for
mischief; and having, probably, no similar excuse. And thus at last, about
ten miles from Preston, I found myself left in charge of his Majesty's
London and Glasgow mail, then running about eleven miles an hour.

What made this negligence less criminal than else it must have been
thought, was the condition of the roads at night during the assizes. At
that time all the law business of populous Liverpool, and of populous
Manchester, with its vast cincture of populous rural districts, was called
up by ancient usage to the tribunal of Lilliputian Lancaster. To break up
this old traditional usage required a conflict with powerful established
interests, a large system of new arrangements, and a new parliamentary
statute. As things were at present, twice in the year so vast a body of
business rolled northwards, from the southern quarter of the county, that
a fortnight at least occupied the severe exertions of two judges for its
dispatch. The consequence of this was--that every horse available for such
a service, along the whole line of road, was exhausted in carrying down the
multitudes of people who were parties to the different suits. By sunset,
therefore, it usually happened that, through utter exhaustion amongst
men and horses, the roads were all silent. Except exhaustion in the vast
adjacent county of York from a contested election, nothing like it was
ordinarily witnessed in England.

On this occasion, the usual silence and solitude prevailed along the road.
Not a hoof nor a wheel was to be heard. And to strengthen this false
luxurious confidence in the noiseless roads, it happened also that the
night was one of peculiar solemnity and peace. I myself, though slightly
alive to the possibilities of peril, had so far yielded to the influence of
the mighty calm as to sink into a profound reverie. The month was August,
in which lay my own birth-day; a festival to every thoughtful man
suggesting solemn and often sigh-born thoughts.[1] The county was my own
native county--upon which, in its southern section, more than upon any
equal area known to man past or present, had descended the original curse
of labour in its heaviest form, not mastering the bodies of men only as of
slaves, or criminals in mines, but working through the fiery will. Upon no
equal space of earth, was, or ever had been, the same energy of human
power put forth daily. At this particular season also of the assizes, that
dreadful hurricane of flight and pursuit, as it might have seemed to a
stranger, that swept to and from Lancaster all day long, hunting the
county up and down, and regularly subsiding about sunset, united with the
permanent distinction of Lancashire as the very metropolis and citadel of
labour, to point the thoughts pathetically upon that counter vision of
rest, of saintly repose from strife and sorrow, towards which, as to their
secret haven, the profounder aspirations of man's heart are continually
travelling. Obliquely we were nearing the sea upon our left, which also
must, under the present circumstances, be repeating the general state of
halcyon repose. The sea, the atmosphere, the light, bore an orchestral part
in this universal lull. Moonlight, in the first timid tremblings of the
dawn, were now blending: and the blendings were brought into a still more
exquisite state of unity, by a slight silvery mist, motionless and dreamy,
that covered the woods and fields, but with a veil of equable transparency.
Except the feet of our own horses, which, running on a sandy margin of the
road, made little disturbance, there was no sound abroad. In the clouds,
and on the earth, prevailed the same majestic peace; and in spite of all
that the villain of a schoolmaster has done for the ruin of our sublimer
thoughts, which are the thoughts of our infancy, we still believe in no
such nonsense as a limited atmosphere. Whatever we may swear with our false
feigning lips, in our faithful hearts we still believe, and must for ever
believe, in fields of air traversing the total gulf between earth and the
central heavens. Still, in the confidence of children that tread without
fear _every_ chamber in their father's house, and to whom no door is
closed, we, in that Sabbatic vision which sometimes is revealed for an hour
upon nights like this, ascend with easy steps from the sorrow-stricken
fields of earth, upwards to the sandals of God.

Suddenly from thoughts like these, I was awakened to a sullen sound, as
of some motion on the distant road. It stole upon the air for a moment; I
listened in awe; but then it died away. Once roused, however, I could not
but observe with alarm the quickened motion of our horses. Ten years'
experience had made my eye learned in the valuing of motion; and I saw that
we were now running thirteen miles an hour. I pretend to no presence of
mind. On the contrary, my fear is, that I am miserably and shamefully
deficient in that quality as regards action. The palsy of doubt and
distraction hangs like some guilty weight of dark unfathomed remembrances
upon my energies, when the signal is flying for _action_. But, on the other
hand, this accursed gift I have, as regards _thought_, that in the first
step towards the possibility of a misfortune, I see its total evolution: in
the radix I see too certainly and too instantly its entire expansion; in
the first syllable of the dreadful sentence, I read already the last. It
was not that I feared for ourselves. What could injure _us_? Our bulk and
impetus charmed us against peril in any collision. And I had rode through
too many hundreds of perils that were frightful to approach, that were
matter of laughter as we looked back upon them, for any anxiety to rest
upon _our_ interests. The mail was not built, I felt assured, nor bespoke,
that could betray _me_ who trusted to its protection. But any carriage that
we could meet would be frail and light in comparison of ourselves. And I
remarked this ominous accident of our situation. We were on the wrong side
of the road. But then the other party, if other there was, might also be on
the wrong side; and two wrongs might make a right. _That_ was not likely.
The same motive which had drawn _us_ to the right-hand side of the road,
viz., the soft beaten sand, as contrasted with the paved centre, would
prove attractive to others. Our lamps, still lighted, would give the
impression of vigilance on our part. And every creature that met us, would
rely upon _us_ for quartering.[1] All this, and if the separate links of
the anticipation had been a thousand times more, I saw--not discursively or
by effort--but as by one flash of horrid intuition.

Under this steady though rapid anticipation of the evil which _might_ be
gathering ahead, ah, reader! what a sullen mystery of fear, what a sigh of
woe, seemed to steal upon the air, as again the far-off sound of a
wheel was heard! A whisper it was--a whisper from, perhaps, four miles
off--secretly announcing a ruin that, being foreseen, was not the less
inevitable. What could be done--who was it that could do it--to check the
storm-flight of these maniacal horses? What! could I not seize the reins
from the grasp of the slumbering coachman? You, reader, think that it would
have been in _your_ power to do so. And I quarrel not with your estimate of
yourself. But, from the way in which the coachman's hand was viced between
his upper and lower thigh, this was impossible. The guard subsequently
found it impossible, after this danger had passed. Not the grasp only, but
also the position of this Polyphemus, made the attempt impossible. You
still think otherwise. See, then, that bronze equestrian statue. The cruel
rider has kept the bit in his horse's mouth for two centuries. Unbridle
him, for a minute, if you please, and wash his mouth with water. Or stay,
reader, unhorse me that marble emperor; knock me those marble feet from
those marble stirrups of Charlemagne.

The sounds ahead strengthened, and were now too clearly the sounds of
wheels. Who and what could it be? Was it industry in a taxed cart? Was it
youthful gaiety in a gig? Whoever it was, something must be attempted to
warn them. Upon the other party rests the active responsibility, but upon
_us_--and, woe is me! that _us_ was my single self--rest the responsibility
of warning. Yet, how should this be accomplished? Might I not seize the
guard's horn? Already, on the first thought, I was making my way over the
roof to the guard's seat. But this, from the foreign mails being piled upon
the roof, was a difficult, and even dangerous attempt, to one cramped by
nearly three hundred miles of outside travelling. And, fortunately, before
I had lost much time in the attempt, our frantic horses swept round an
angle of the road, which opened upon us the stage where the collision must
be accomplished, the parties that seemed summoned to the trial, and the
impossibility of saving them by any communication with the guard.

Before us lay an avenue, straight as an arrow, six hundred yards, perhaps,
in length; and the umbrageous trees, which rose in a regular line from
either side, meeting high overhead, gave to it the character of a cathedral
aisle. These trees lent a deeper solemnity to the early light; but there
was still light enough to perceive, at the further end of this gothic
aisle, a light, reedy gig, in which were seated a young man, and, by his
side, a young lady. Ah, young sir! what are you about? If it is necessary
that you should whisper your communications to this young lady--though
really I see nobody at this hour, and on this solitary road, likely to
overhear your conversation--is it, therefore, necessary that you should
carry your lips forward to hers? The little carriage is creeping on at one
mile an hour; and the parties within it, being thus tenderly engaged, are
naturally bending down their heads. Between them and eternity, to all human
calculation, there is but a minute and a half. What is it that I shall do?
Strange it is, and to a mere auditor of the tale, might seem laughable,
that I should need a suggestion from the _Iliad_ to prompt the sole
recourse that remained. But so it was. Suddenly I remembered the shout of
Achilles, and its effect. But could I pretend to shout like the son of
Peleus, aided by Pallas? No, certainly: but then I needed not the shout
that should alarm all Asia militant; a shout would suffice, such as should
carry terror into the hearts of two thoughtless young people, and one
gig horse. I shouted--and the young man heard me not. A second time I
shouted--and now he heard me, for now he raised his head.

Here, then, all had been done that, by me, _could_ be done: more on _my_
part was not possible. Mine had been the first step: the second was for the
young man: the third was for God. If, said I, the stranger is a brave man,
and if, indeed, he loves the young girl at his side--or, loving her not, if
he feels the obligation pressing upon every man worthy to be called a man,
of doing his utmost for a woman confided to his protection--he will at
least make some effort to save her. If _that_ fails, he will not perish the
more, or by a death more cruel, for having made it; and he will die as a
brave man should, with his face to the danger, and with his arm about the
woman that he sought in vain to save. But if he makes no effort, shrinking,
without a struggle, from his duty, he himself will not the less certainly
perish for this baseness of poltroonery. He will die no less: and why not?
Wherefore should we grieve that there is one craven less in the world? No;
_let_ him perish, without a pitying thought of ours wasted upon him; and,
in that case, all our grief will be reserved for the fate of the helpless
girl, who now, upon the least shadow of failure in _him_, must, by the
fiercest of translations--must, without time for a prayer--must, within
seventy seconds, stand before the judgment-seat of God.

But craven he was not: sudden had been the call upon him, and sudden was
his answer to the call. He saw, he heard, he comprehended, the ruin that
was coming down: already its gloomy shadow darkened above him; and already
he was measuring his strength to deal with it. Ah! what a vulgar thing does
courage seem, when we see nations buying it and selling it for a shilling a
day: ah! what a sublime thing does courage seem, when some fearful crisis
on the great deeps of life carries a man, as if running before a hurricane,
up to the giddy crest of some mountainous wave, from which accordingly as
he chooses his course, he describes two courses, and a voice says to him
audibly, "This way lies hope; take the other way and mourn for ever!" Yet,
even then, amidst the raving of the seas and the frenzy of the danger, the
man is able to confront his situation--is able to retire for a moment
into solitude with God, and to seek all his counsel from _him_! For seven
seconds, it might be, of his seventy, the stranger settled his countenance
steadfastly upon us, as if to search and value every element in the
conflict before him. For five seconds more he sate immovably, like one that
mused on some great purpose. For five he sate with eyes upraised, like one
that prayed in sorrow, under some extremity of doubt, for wisdom to guide
him towards the better choice. Then suddenly he rose; stood upright; and,
by a sudden strain upon the reins, raising his horse's forefeet from the
ground, he slewed him round on the pivot of his hind legs, so as to plant
the little equipage in a position nearly at right angles to ours. Thus
far his condition was not improved; except as a first step had been taken
towards the possibility of a second. If no more were done, nothing was
done; for the little carriage still occupied the very centre of our path,
though in an altered direction. Yet even now it may not be too late:
fifteen of the twenty seconds may still be unexhausted; and one almighty
bound forward may avail to clear the ground. Hurry then; hurry! for the
flying moments--_they_ hurry! Oh hurry, hurry, my brave young man! for the
cruel hoofs of our horses--_they_ also hurry! Fast are the flying moments,
faster are the hoofs of our horses. Fear not for _him_, if human energy can
suffice: faithful was he that drove, to his terrific duty; faithful was the
horse to _his_ command. One blow, one impulse given with voice and hand by
the stranger, one rush from the horse, one bound as if in the act of rising
to a fence, landed the docile creature's forefeet upon the crown or arching
centre of the road. The larger half of the little equipage had then cleared
our over-towering shadow: _that_ was evident even to my own agitated sight.
But it mattered little that one wreck should float off in safety, if upon
the wreck that perished were embarked the human freightage. The rear part
of the carriage--was _that_ certainly beyond the line of absolute ruin?
What power could answer the question? Glance of eye, thought of man, wing
of angel, which of these had speed enough to sweep between the question and
the answer, and divide the one from the other? Light does not tread upon
the steps of light more indivisibly, than did our all-conquering arrival
upon the escaping efforts of the gig. _That_ must the young man have felt
too plainly. His back was now turned to us; not by sight could he any
longer communicate with the peril; but by the dreadful rattle of our
harness, too truly had his ear been instructed--that all was finished as
regarded any further effort of _his_. Already in resignation he had rested
from his struggle; and perhaps, in his heart he was whispering--"Father,
which art above, do thou finish in heaven what I on earth have attempted."
We ran past them faster than ever mill-race in our inexorable flight. Oh,
raving of hurricanes that must have sounded in their young ears at the
moment of our transit! Either with the swingle-bar, or with the haunch of
our near leader, we had struck the off-wheel of the little gig, which stood
rather obliquely and not quite so far advanced as to be accurately parallel
with the near wheel. The blow, from the fury of our passage, resounded
terrifically. I rose in horror, to look upon the ruins we might have
caused. From my elevated station I looked down., and looked back upon the
scene, which in a moment told its tale, and wrote all its records on my
heart for ever.

The horse was planted immovably, with his fore-feet upon the paved crest of
the central road. He of the whole party was alone untouched by the passion
of death. The little cany carriage--partly perhaps from the dreadful
torsion of the wheels in its recent movement, partly from the thundering
blow we had given to it--as if it sympathized with human horror, was all
alive with tremblings and shiverings. The young man sat like a rock. He
stirred not at all. But _his_ was the steadiness of agitation frozen into
rest by horror. As yet he dared not to look round; for he knew that, if
anything remained to do, by him it could no longer be done. And as yet he
knew not for certain if their safety were accomplished. But the lady--

But the lady--! Oh heavens! will that spectacle ever depart from my dreams,
as she rose and sank upon her seat, sank and rose, threw up her arms wildly
to heaven, clutched at some visionary object in the air, fainting, praying,
raving, despairing! Figure to yourself, reader, the elements of the case;
suffer me to recall before your mind the circumstances of the unparalleled
situation. From the silence and deep peace of this saintly summer
night--from the pathetic blending of this sweet moonlight, dawnlight,
dreamlight--from the manly tenderness of this flattering, whispering,
murmuring love--suddenly as from the woods and fields--suddenly as from
the chambers of the air opening in revelation--suddenly as from the ground
yawning at her feet, leaped upon her, with the flashing of cataracts, Death
the crowned phantom, with all the equipage of his terrors, and the tiger
roar of his voice.

The moments were numbered. In the twinkling of an eye our flying horses had
carried us to the termination of the umbrageous aisle; at right angles we
wheeled into our former direction; the turn of the road carried the scene
out of my eyes in an instant, and swept it into my dreams for ever.

  "Whence the sound
  Of instruments, that made melodious chime,
  Was heard, of harp and organ; and who mov'd
  Their stops and chords, was seen; his volant touch
  Instinct through all proportions, low and high,
  Fled and pursued transverse the resonant fugue."

Passion of Sudden Death! that once in youth I read and interpreted by the
shadows of thy averted[1] signs;--Rapture of panic taking the shape which
amongst tombs in churches I have seen, of woman bursting her sepulchral
bonds--of woman's Ionic form bending forward from the ruins of her grave
with arching foot, with eyes upraised, with clasped adoring hands--waiting,
watching, trembling, praying, for the trumpet's call to rise from dust
for ever!--Ah, vision too fearful of shuddering humanity on the brink
of abysses! vision that didst start back--that didst reel away--like a
shrivelling scroll from before the wrath of fire racing on the wings of the
wind! Epilepsy so brief of horror--wherefore is it that thou canst not die?
Passing so suddenly into darkness, wherefore is it that still thou sheddest
thy sad funeral blights upon the gorgeous mosaics of dreams? Fragment of
music too stern, heard once and heard no more, what aileth thee that thy
deep rolling chords come up at intervals through all the worlds of sleep,
and after thirty years have lost no element of horror?

Lo, it is summer, almighty summer! The everlasting gates of life and summer
are thrown open wide; and on the ocean, tranquil and verdant as a savanna,
the unknown lady from the dreadful vision and I myself are floating: she
upon a fairy pinnace, and I upon an English three-decker. But both of
us are wooing gales of festal happiness within the domain of our common
country--within that ancient watery park--within that pathless chase where
England takes her pleasure as a huntress through winter and summer, and
which stretches from the rising to the setting sun. Ah! what a wilderness
of floral beauty was hidden, or was suddenly revealed, upon the tropic
islands, through which the pinnace moved. And upon her deck what a bevy
of human flowers--young women how lovely, young men how noble, that were
dancing together, and slowly drifting towards _us_ amidst music and
incense, amidst blossoms from forests and gorgeous corymbi from vintages,
amidst natural caroling and the echoes of sweet girlish laughter. Slowly
the pinnace nears us, gaily she hails us, and slowly she disappears beneath
the shadow of our mighty bows. But then, as at some signal from heaven, the
music and the carols, and the sweet echoing of girlish laughter--all are
hushed. What evil has smitten the pinnace, meeting or overtaken her? Did
ruin to our friends couch within our own dreadful shadow? Was our shadow
the shadow of death? I looked over the bow for an answer; and, behold! the
pinnace was dismantled; the revel and the revellers were found no more; the
glory of the vintage was dust; and the forest was left without a witness to
its beauty upon the seas. "But where," and I turned to our own crew--"Where
are the lovely women that danced beneath the awning of flowers and
clustering corymbi? Whither have fled the noble young men that danced with
_them_?" Answer there was none. But suddenly the man at the mast-head,
whose countenance darkened with alarm, cried out--"Sail on the weather
beam! Down she comes upon us: in seventy seconds she will founder!"


2.

I looked to the weather side, and the summer had departed. The sea was
rocking, and shaken with gathering wrath. Upon its surface sate mighty
mists, which grouped themselves into arches and long cathedral aisles. Down
one of these, with the fiery pace of a quarrel from a cross-bow, ran a
frigate right athwart our course. "Are they mad?" some voice exclaimed from
our deck. "Are they blind? Do they woo their ruin?" But in a moment, as she
was close upon us, some impulse of a heady current or sudden vortex gave a
wheeling bias to her course, and off she forged without a shock. As she ran
past us, high aloft amongst the shrouds stood the lady of the pinnace. The
deeps opened ahead in malice to receive her, towering surges of foam ran
after her, the billows were fierce to catch her. But far away she was borne
into desert spaces of the sea: whilst still by sight I followed her, as she
ran before the howling gale, chased by angry sea-birds and by maddening
billows; still I saw her, as at the moment when she ran past us, amongst
the shrouds, with her white draperies streaming before the wind. There
she stood with hair dishevelled, one hand clutched amongst the
tackling--rising, sinking, fluttering, trembling, praying--there for
leagues I saw her as she stood, raising at intervals one hand to heaven,
amidst the fiery crests of the pursuing waves and the raving of the storm;
until at last, upon a sound from afar of malicious laughter and mockery,
all was hidden for ever in driving showers; and afterwards, but when I know
not, and how I know not.


3.

Sweet funeral bells from some incalculable distance, wailing over the dead
that die before the dawn, awakened me as I slept in a boat moored to some
familiar shore. The morning twilight even then was breaking; and, by the
dusky revelations which it spread, I saw a girl adorned with a garland
of white roses about her head for some great festival, running along the
solitary strand with extremity of haste. Her running was the running of
panic; and often she looked back as to some dreadful enemy in the rear. But
when I leaped ashore, and followed on her steps to warn her of a peril in
front, alas! from me she fled as from another peril; and vainly I shouted
to her of quicksands that lay ahead. Faster and faster she ran; round a
promontory of rocks she wheeled out of sight; in an instant I also wheeled
round it, but only to see the treacherous sands gathering above her head.
Already her person was buried; only the fair young head and the diadem of
white roses around it were still visible to the pitying heavens; and, last
of all, was visible one marble arm. I saw by the early twilight this fair
young head, as it was sinking down to darkness--saw this marble arm, as it
rose above her head and her treacherous grave, tossing, faultering,
rising, clutching as at some false deceiving hand stretched out from the
clouds--saw this marble arm uttering her dying hope, and then her dying
despair. The head, the diadem, the arm,--these all had sunk; at last over
these also the cruel quicksand had closed; and no memorial of the fair
young girl remained on earth, except my own solitary tears, and the funeral
bells from the desert seas, that, rising again more softly, sang a requiem
over the grave of the buried child, and over her blighted dawn.

I sate, and wept in secret the tears that men have ever given to the memory
of those that died before the dawn, and by the treachery of earth, our
mother. But the tears and funeral bells were hushed suddenly by a shout
as of many nations, and by a roar as from some great king's artillery
advancing rapidly along the valleys, and heard afar by its echoes among
the mountains. "Hush!" I said, as I bent my ear earthwards to
listen--"hush!--this either is the very anarchy of strife, or else"--and
then I listened more profoundly, and said as I raised my head--"or else, oh
heavens! it is _victory_ that swallows up all strife."


4.

Immediately, in trance, I was carried over land and sea to some distant
kingdom, and placed upon a triumphal car, amongst companions crowned with
laurel. The darkness of gathering midnight, brooding over all the land, hid
from us the mighty crowds that were weaving restlessly about our carriage
as a centre--we heard them, but we saw them not. Tidings had arrived,
within an hour, of a grandeur that measured itself against centuries; too
full of pathos they were, too full of joy that acknowledged no fountain
but God, to utter themselves by other language than by tears, by restles
anthems, by reverberations rising from every choir, of the _Gloria in
excelsis_. These tidings we that sate upon the laurelled car had it for our
privilege to publish amongst all nations. And already, by signs audible
through the darkness, by snortings and tramplings, our angry horses, that
knew no fear of fleshly weariness, upbraided us with delay. Wherefore _was_
it that we delayed? We waited for a secret word, that should bear witness
to the hope of nations, as now accomplished for ever. At midnight the
secret word arrived; which word was--Waterloo and Recovered Christendom!
The dreadful word shone by its own light; before us it went; high above our
leaders' heads it rode, and spread a golden light over the paths which we
traversed. Every city, at the presence of the secret word, threw open its
gates to receive us. The rivers were silent as we crossed. All the infinite
forests, as we ran along their margins, shivered in homage to the secret
word. And the darkness comprehended it.

Two hours after midnight we reached a mighty minster. Its gates, which rose
to the clouds, were closed. But when the dreadful word, that rode before
us, reached them with its golden light, silently they moved back upon their
hinges; and at a flying gallop our equipage entered the grand aisle of the
cathedral. Headlong was our pace; and at every altar, in the little chapels
and oratories to the right hand and left of our course, the lamps, dying or
sickening, kindled anew in sympathy with the secret word that was flying
past. Forty leagues we might have run in the cathedral, and as yet no
strength of morning light had reached us, when we saw before us the aërial
galleries of the organ and the choir. Every pinnacle of the fretwork, every
station of advantage amongst the traceries, was crested by white-robed
choristers, that sang deliverance; that wept no more tears, as once their
fathers had wept; but at intervals that sang together to the generations,
saying--

  "Chaunt the deliverer's praise in every tongue,"

and receiving answers from afar,

  --"such as once in heaven and earth were sung."

And of their chaunting was no end; of our headlong pace was neither pause
nor remission.

Thus, as we ran like torrents--thus, as we swept with bridal rapture over
the Campo Santo[1] of the cathedral graves--suddenly we became aware of
a vast necropolis rising upon the far-off horizon--a city of sepulchres,
built within the saintly cathedral for the warrior dead that rested from
their feuds on earth. Of purple granite was the necropolis; yet, in the
first minute, it lay like a purple stain upon the horizon--so mighty was
the distance. In the second minute it trembled through many changes,
growing into terraces and towers of wondrous altitude, so mighty was the
pace. In the third minute already, with our dreadful gallop, we were
entering its suburbs. Vast sarcophagi rose on every side, having towers and
turrets that, upon the limits of the central aisle, strode forward with
haughty intrusion, that ran back with mighty shadows into answering
recesses. Every sarcophagus showed many bas-reliefs--bas-reliefs of
battles--bas-reliefs of battle-fields; of battles from forgotten ages--of
battles from yesterday--of battle-fields that, long since, nature had
healed and reconciled to herself with the sweet oblivion of flowers--of
battle-fields that were yet angry and crimson with carnage. Where the
terraces ran, there did _we_ run; where the towers curved, there did _we_
curve. With the flight of swallows our horses swept round every angle. Like
rivers in flood, wheeling round headlands; like hurricanes that side
into the secrets of forests; faster than ever light unwove the mazes of
darkness, our flying equipage carried earthly passions--kindled warrior
instincts--amongst the dust that lay around us; dust oftentimes of our
noble fathers that had slept in God from Créci to Trafalgar. And now had we
reached the last sarcophagus, now were we abreast of the last bas-relief,
already had we recovered the arrow-like flight of the illimitable central
aisle, when coming up this aisle to meet us we beheld a female infant that
rode in a carriage as frail as flowers. The mists, which went before her,
hid the fawns that drew her, but could not hide the shells and tropic
flowers with which she played--but could not hide the lovely smiles by
which she uttered her trust in the mighty cathedral, and in the cherubim
that looked down upon her from the topmast shafts of its pillars. Face to
face she was meeting us; face to face she rode, as if danger there were
none. "Oh, baby!" I exclaimed, "shalt thou be the ransom for Waterloo? Must
we, that carry tidings of great joy to every people, be messengers of ruin
to thee?" In horror I rose at the thought; but then also, in horror at the
thought, rose one that was sculptured on the bas-relief--a dying trumpeter.
Solemnly from the field of battle he rose to his feet; and, unslinging
his stony trumpet, carried it, in his dying anguish, to his stony
lips--sounding once, and yet once again; proclamation that, in _thy_ ears,
oh baby! must have spoken from the battlements of death. Immediately deep
shadows fell between us, and aboriginal silence. The choir had ceased to
sing. The hoofs of our horses, the rattling of our harness, alarmed the
graves no more. By horror the bas-relief had been unlocked into life. By
horror we, that were so full of life, we men and our horses, with their
fiery fore-legs rising in mid air to their everlasting gallop, were frozen
to a bas-relief. Then a third time the trumpet sounded; the seals were
taken off all pulses; life, and the frenzy of life, tore into their
channels again; again the choir burst forth in sunny grandeur, as from
the muffling of storms and darkness; again the thunderings of our horses
carried temptation into the graves. One cry burst from our lips as the
clouds, drawing off from the aisle, showed it empty before us--"Whither has
the infant fled?--is the young child caught up to God?" Lo! afar off, in a
vast recess, rose three mighty windows to the clouds: and on a level with
their summits, at height insuperable to man, rose an altar of purest
alabaster. On its eastern face was trembling a crimson glory. Whence came
_that_? Was it from the reddening dawn that now streamed _through_ the
windows? Was it from the crimson robes of the martyrs that were painted
_on_ the windows? Was it from the bloody bas-reliefs of earth? Whencesoever
it were--there, within that crimson radiance, suddenly appeared a female
head, and then a female figure. It was the child--now grown up to woman's
height. Clinging to the horns of the altar, there she stood--sinking,
rising, trembling, fainting--raving, despairing; and behind the volume of
incense that, night and day, streamed upwards from the altar, was seen the
fiery font, and dimly was descried the outline of the dreadful being that
should baptize her with the baptism of death. But by her side was kneeling
her better angel, that hid his face with wings; that wept and pleaded for
_her_; that prayed when _she_ could _not_; that fought with heaven by tears
for _her_ deliverance; which also, as he raised his immortal countenance
from his wings, I saw, by the glory in his eye, that he had won at last.

5.

Then rose the agitation, spreading through the infinite cathedral, to its
agony; then was completed the passion of the mighty fugue. The golden
tubes of the organ, which as yet had but sobbed and muttered at
intervals--gleaming amongst clouds and surges of incense--threw up, as
from fountains unfathomable, columns of heart-shattering music. Choir
and anti-choir were filling fast with unknown voices. Thou also, Dying
Trumpeter!--with thy love that was victorious, and thy anguish that was
finishing, didst enter the tumult: trumpet and echo--farewell love, and
farewell anguish--rang through the dreadful _sanctus_. We, that spread
flight before us, heard the tumult, as of flight, mustering behind us. In
fear we looked round for the unknown steps that, in flight or in pursuit,
were gathering upon our own. Who were these that followed? The faces, which
no man could count--whence were _they_? "Oh, darkness of the grave!" I
exclaimed, "that from the crimson altar and from the fiery font wert
visited with secret light--that wert searched by the effulgence in the
angel's eye--were these indeed thy children? Pomps of life, that, from the
burials of centuries, rose again to the voice of perfect joy, could it be
_ye_ that had wrapped me in the reflux of panic?" What ailed me, that I
should fear when the triumphs of earth were advancing? Ah! Pariah heart
within me, that couldst never hear the sound of joy without sullen whispers
of treachery in ambush; that, from six years old, didst never hear the
promise of perfect love, without seeing aloft amongst the stars fingers
as of a man's hand, writing the secret legend--"_Ashes to ashes, dust to
dust_!"--wherefore shouldst _thou_ not fear, though all men should rejoice?
Lo! as I looked back for seventy leagues through the mighty cathedral, and
saw the quick and the dead that sang together to God, together that sang
to the generations of man--ah! raving, as of torrents that opened on every
side: trepidation, as of female and infant steps that fled--ah! rushing,
as of wings that chase! But I heard a voice from heaven, which said--"Let
there be no reflux of panic--let there be no more fear, and no more sudden
death! Cover them with joy as the tides cover the shore!" _That_ heard the
children of the choir, _that_ heard the children of the grave. All the
hosts of jubilation made ready to move. Like armies that ride in pursuit,
they moved with one step. Us, that, with laurelled heads, were passing from
the cathedral through its eastern gates, they overtook, and, as with a
garment, they wrapped us round with thunders that overpowered our own.
As brothers we moved together; to the skies we rose--to the dawn that
advanced--to the stars that fled; rendering thanks to God in the
highest--that, having hid his face through one generation behind thick
clouds of War, once again was ascending--was ascending from Waterloo--in
the visions of Peace; rendering thanks for thee, young girl! whom having
overshadowed with his ineffable passion of death--suddenly did God relent;
suffered thy angel to turn aside his arm; and even in thee, sister unknown!
shown to me for a moment only to be hidden for ever, found an occasion to
glorify his goodness. A thousand times, amongst the phantoms of sleep, has
he shown thee to me, standing before the golden dawn, and ready to enter
its gates--with the dreadful word going before thee--with the armies of the
grave behind thee; shown thee to me, sinking, rising, fluttering, fainting,
but then suddenly reconciled, adoring: a thousand times has he followed
thee in the worlds of sleep--through storms; through desert seas; through
the darkness of quicksands; through fugues and the persecution of fugues;
through dreams, and the dreadful resurrections that are in dreams--only
that at the last, with one motion of his victorious arm, he might record
and emblazon the endless resurrections of his love!

Great misconceptions have always prevailed about the Roman _dinner_.
Dinner [_coena_] was the only meal which the Romans as a nation took. It
was no accident, but arose out of their whole social economy. This we shall
show by running through the history of a Roman day. _Ridentem dicere, verum
quid vetat_? And the course of this review will expose one or two important
truths in ancient political economy, which have been wholly overlooked.

With the lark it was that the Roman rose. Not that the earliest lark rises
so early in Latium as the earliest lark in England; that is, during summer:
but then, on the other hand, neither does it ever rise so late. The Roman
citizen was stirring with the dawn--which, allowing for the shorter
longest-day and longer shortest-day of Rome, you may call about four in
summer--about seven in winter. Why did he do this? Because he went to bed
at a very early hour. But why did he do that? By backing in this way, we
shall surely back into the very well of truth: always, if it is possible,
let us have the _pourquoi_ of the _pourquoi_. The Roman went to bed early
for two special reasons. 1st, Because in Rome, which had been built for a
martial destiny, every habit of life had reference to the usages of war.
Every citizen, if he were not a mere proletarian animal kept at the public
cost, held himself a sort of soldier-elect: the more noble he was, the
more was his liability to military service: in short, all Rome, and at all
times, was consciously "in procinct."[1] Now it was a principle of ancient
warfare, that every hour of daylight had a triple worth, if valued
against hours of darkness. That was one reason--a reason suggested by the
understanding. But there was a second reason, far more remarkable; and this
was a reason dictated by a blind necessity. It is an important fact, that
this planet on which we live, this little industrious earth of ours, has
developed her wealth by slow stages of increase. She was far from being the
rich little globe in Cæsar's days that she is at present. The earth in our
days is incalculably richer, as a whole, than in the time of Charlemagne:
at that time she was richer, by many a million of acres, than in the era
of Augustus. In that Augustan era we descry a clear belt of cultivation,
averaging about six hundred miles in depth, running in a ring-fence about
the Mediterranean. This belt, _and no more_, was in decent cultivation.
Beyond that belt, there was only a wild Indian cultivation. At present
what a difference! We have that very belt, but much richer, all things
considered _æquatis æquandis_, than in the Roman era. The reader must not
look to single cases, as that of Egypt or other parts of Africa, but take
the whole collectively. On that scheme of valuation, we have the old Roman
belt, the Mediterranean riband not much tarnished, and we have all the
rest of Europe to boot--or, speaking in scholar's language, as a _lucro
ponamus_. We say nothing of remoter gains. Such being the case, our mother,
the earth, being (as a whole) so incomparably poorer, could not in the
Pagan era support the expense of maintaining great empires in cold
latitudes. Her purse would not reach that cost. Wherever she undertook in
those early ages to rear man in great abundance, it must be where nature
would consent to work in partnership with herself; where _warmth_ was to
be had for nothing; where _clothes_ were not so entirely indispensable but
that a ragged fellow might still keep himself warm; where slight _shelter_
might serve; and where the _soil_, if not absolutely richer in reversionary
wealth, was more easily cultured. Nature must come forward liberally, and
take a number of shares in every new joint-stock concern before it could
move. Man, therefore, went to bed early in those ages, simply because his
worthy mother earth could not afford him candles. She, good old lady, (or
good young lady, for geologists know not[2] whether she is in that stage
of her progress which corresponds to gray hairs, or to infancy, or to "a
_certain_ age,")--she, good lady, would certainly have shuddered to hear
any of her nations asking for candles. "Candles!" She would have said, "Who
ever heard of such a thing? and with so much excellent daylight running to
waste, as I have provided _gratis_! What will the wretches want next?"

The daylight, furnished _gratis_, was certainly "neat," and "undeniable"
in its quality, and quite sufficient for all purposes that were honest.
Seneca, even in his own luxurious period, called those men "_lucifugæ_,"
and by other ugly names, who lived chiefly by candle-light. None but rich
and luxurious men, nay, even amongst these, none but idlers _did_ live much
by candle-light. An immense majority of men in Rome never lighted a candle,
unless sometimes in the early dawn. And this custom of Rome was the custom
also of all nations that lived round the great pond of the Mediterranean.
In Athens, Egypt, Palestine, Asia Minor, everywhere, the ancients went to
bed, like good boys, from seven to nine o'clock.[3] The Turks and other
people, who have succeeded to the stations and the habits of the ancients,
do so at this day.

The Roman, therefore, who saw no joke in sitting round a table in the dark,
went off to bed as the darkness began. Everybody did so. Old Numa Pompilius
himself, was obliged to trundle off in the dusk. Tarquinius might be a very
superb fellow; but we doubt whether he ever saw a farthing rushlight. And,
though it may be thought that plots and conspiracies would flourish in
such a city of darkness, it is to be considered, that the conspirators
themselves had no more candles than honest men: both parties were in the
dark.

Being up then, and stirring not long after the lark, what mischief did the
Roman go about first? Now-a-days, he would have taken a pipe or a cigar.
But, alas for the ignorance of the poor heathen creatures! they had neither
one nor the other. In this point, we must tax our mother earth with
being really _too_ stingy. In the case of the candles, we approve of her
parsimony. Much mischief is brewed by candle-light. But, it was coming it
too strong to allow no tobacco. Many a wild fellow in Rome, your Gracchi,
Syllas, Catilines, would not have played "h---- and Tommy" in the way they
did, if they could have soothed their angry stomachs with a cigar--a pipe
has intercepted many an evil scheme. But the thing is past helping now. At
Rome, you must do as "they does" at Rome. So, after shaving, (supposing the
age of the _Barbati_ to be passed), what is the first business that our
Roman will undertake? Forty to one he is a poor man, born to look upwards
to his fellow-men--and not to look down upon anybody but slaves. He goes,
therefore, to the palace of some grandee, some top-sawyer of the Senatorian
order. This great man, for all his greatness, has turned out even sooner
than himself. For he also has had no candles and no cigars; and he well
knows, that before the sun looks into his portals, all his halls will be
overflowing and buzzing with the matin susurrus of courtiers--the "mane
salutantes."[4] it is as much as his popularity is worth to absent himself,
or to keep people waiting. But surely, the reader may think, this poor man
he might keep waiting. No, he might not; for, though poor, being a citizen,
he is a gentleman. That was the consequence of keeping slaves. Wherever
there is a class of slaves, he that enjoys the _jus suffragii_ (no
matter how poor) is a gentleman. The true Latin word for a gentleman is
_ingentius_--a freeman and the son of a freeman.

Yet even here there _were_ distinctions. Under the Emperors, the courtiers
were divided into two classes: with respect to the superior class, it was
said of the sovereign--that he _saw_ them, (_videbat_;) with respect to the
other--that he _was seen_, ("_videbatur_.") Even Plutarch mentions it as
a common boast in his times, [Greek: aemas eiden ho basileus]--_Cæsar is
in the habit of seeing me_; or, as a common plea for evading a suit,
[Greek: ora mallon]--_I am sorry to say he is more inclined to look upon
others_. And this usage derived itself (mark that well!) from the
_republican_ era. The aulic spirit was propagated by the Empire, but from
a republican root.

Having paid his court, you will suppose that our friend comes home to
breakfast. Not at all: no such discovery as "breakfast" had then been made:
breakfast was not invented for many centuries after that. We have always
admired, and always shall admire, as the very best of all human stories,
Charles Lamb's account of the origin of _roast pig_ in China. Ching Ping,
it seems, had suffered his father's house to be burned down; the outhouses
were burned along with the house; and in one of these the pigs, by
accident, were roasted to a turn. Memorable were the results for all future
China and future civilization. Ping, who (like all China beside) had
hitherto eaten his pig raw, now for the first time tasted it in a state
of torrefaction. Of course he made his peace with his father by a part
(tradition says a leg) of the new dish. The father was so astounded with
the discovery, that he burned his house down once a year for the sake of
coming at an annual banquet of roast pig. A curious prying sort of fellow,
one Chang Pang, got to know of this. He also burned down a house with a
pig in it, and had his eyes opened. The secret was ill kept--the discovery
spread--many great conversions were made--houses were blazing in every part
of the Celestial Empire. The insurance offices took the matter up.
One Chong Pong, detected in the very act of shutting up a pig in his
drawing-room, and then firing a train, was indicted on a charge of arson.
The chief justice of Pekin, on that occasion, requested an officer of the
court to hand him a piece of the roast pig, the _corpus delicti_, for pure
curiosity led him to taste; but within two days after it was observed that
his lordship's town-house was burned down. In short, all China apostatized
to the new faith; and it was not until some centuries had passed, that a
great genius arose, who established the second era in the history of roast
pig, by showing that it could be had without burning down a house.

No such genius had yet arisen in Rome. Breakfast was not suspected. No
prophecy, no type of breakfast had been published. In fact, it took as much
time and research to arrive at that great discovery as at the Copernican
system. True it is, reader, that you have heard of such a word as
_jentaculum_; and your dictionary translates that old heathen word by
the Christian word _breakfast_. But dictionaries, one and all, are dull
deceivers. Between _jentaculum_ and _breakfast_ the differences are as wide
as between a horse-chestnut and chestnut horse; differences in the _time
when_, in the _place where_, in the _manner how_, but preeminently in the
_thing which_.

Galen is a good authority upon such a subject, since, if (like other
pagans) he ate no breakfast himself, in some sense he may be called the
cause of breakfast to other men, by treating of those things which could
safely be taken upon an empty stomach. As to the time, he (like many other
authors) says, [peri tritaen, ae (to makroteron) peri tetartaen,]
about the third, or at farthest about the fourth hour: and so exact is he,
that he assumes the day to lie exactly between six and six o'clock, and to
be divided into thirteen equal portions. So the time will be a few minutes
before nine, or a few minutes before ten, in the forenoon. That seems fair
enough. But it is not time in respect to its location that we are so
much concerned with, as time in respect to its duration. Now, heaps of
authorities take it for granted, that you are not to sit down--you are to
stand; and, as to the place, that any place will do--"any corner of the
forum," says Galen, "any corner that you fancy;" which is like referring a
man for his _salle à manger_ to Westminster Hall or Fleet Street. Augustus,
in a letter still surviving, tells us that he _jentabat_, or took his
_jentaculum_ in his carriage; now in a wheel carriage, (_in essedo_,) now
in a litter or palanquin (_in lecticâ_.) This careless and disorderly
way as to time and place, and other circumstances of haste, sufficiently
indicate the quality of the meal you are to expect. Already you are
"sagacious of your quarry from so far." Not that we would presume,
excellent reader, to liken you to Death, or to insinuate that you are
"a grim feature." But would it not make a saint "grim," to hear of such
preparations for the morning meal? And then to hear of such consummations
as _panis siccus_, dry bread; or, (if the learned reader thinks it will
taste better in Greek,) [Greek: artos xaeros!] And what may this word
_dry_ happen to mean? "Does it mean stale bread?" says Salmasius. "Shall
we suppose," says he, in querulous words, "_molli et recenti opponi_," and
from that antithesis conclude it to be, "_durum et non recens coctum, eoque
sicciorem_?" Hard and stale, and for that reason the more arid! Not quite
so bad as that, we hope. Or again--"_siccum pro biscocto, ut hodie vocamus,
sumemus_?"[5] By _hodie_ Salmasius means, amongst his countrymen of France,
where _biscoctus_ is verbatim reproduced in the word _bis_ (twice) _cuit_,
(baked;) whence our own _biscuit_. Biscuit might do very well, could we be
sure that it was cabin biscuit: but Salmasius argues--that in this case he
takes it to mean "_buccellatum, qui est panis nauticus_;" that is, the ship
company's biscuit, broken with a sledge-hammer. In Greek, for the benefit
again of the learned reader, it is termed [Greek: dipuros], indicating
that it has passed twice under the action of fire.

"Well," you say, "No matter if it had passed fifty times--and through the
fires of Moloch; only let us have this biscuit, such as it is." In good
faith, then, fasting reader, you are not likely to see much more than you
_have_ seen. It is a very Barmecide feast, we do assure you--this same
"jentaculum;" at which abstinence and patience are much more exercised than
the teeth: faith and hope are the chief graces cultivated, together with
that species of the _magnificum_ which is founded on the _ignotum_. Even
this biscuit was allowed in the most limited quantities; for which reason
it is that the Greeks called this apology for a a meal by the name
of [Greek: bouchismos], a word formed (as many words were in the
Post-Augustan ages) from a Latin word--viz., _buccea_, a mouthful; not
literally such, but so much as a polished man could allow himself to put
into his mouth at once. "We took a mouthful," says Sir William Waller, the
Parliamentary general, "took a mouthful; paid our reckoning; mounted;
and were off." But there Sir William means, by his plausible "mouthful,"
something very much beyond either nine or nineteen ordinary quantities of
that denomination, whereas the Roman "jentaculum" was literally such; and,
accordingly, one of the varieties under which the ancient vocabularies
express this model of evanescent quantities is _gustatio_, a mere tasting;
and again it is called by another variety, _gustus_, a mere taste: [whence
by the usual suppression of the _s_, comes the French word for a collation
or luncheon, viz. _gouter_] Speaking of his uncle, Pliny the Younger
says--"Post solem plerumque lavabatur; deinde gustabat; dormiebat minimum;
mox, quasi alio die, studebat in coenæ tempus". "After taking the air he
bathed; after that he broke his fast on a bit of biscuit, and took a
very slight _siesta_: which done, as if awaking to a new day, he set in
regularly to his studies, and pursued them to dinner-time." _Gustabat_
here meant that nondescript meal which arose at Rome when _jentaculum_ and
_prandium_ were fused into one, and that only a _taste_ or mouthful of
biscuit, as we shall show farther on.

Possibly, however, most excellent reader, like some epicurean traveller,
who, in crossing the Alps, finds himself weather-bound at St. Bernard's
on Ash-Wednesday, you surmise a remedy: you descry some opening from "the
loopholes of retreat," through which a few delicacies might be insinuated
to spread verdure on this arid desert of biscuit. Casuistry can do much. A
dead hand at casuistry has often proved more than a match for Lent with all
his quarantines. But sorry we are to say that, in this case, no relief is
hinted at in any ancient author. A grape or two, (not a bunch of grapes,)
a raisin or two, a date, an olive--these are the whole amount of relief[6]
which the chancery of the Roman kitchen granted in such cases. All things
here hang together, and prove each other; the time, the place, the mode,
the thing. Well might man eat standing, or eat in public, such a trifle
as this. Go home to such a breakfast as this! You would as soon think of
ordering a cloth to be laid in order to eat a peach, or of asking a friend
to join you in an orange. No man makes "two bites of a cherry." So let
us pass on to the other stages of the day. Only in taking leave of this
morning stage, throw your eyes back with us, Christian reader, upon this
truly heathen meal, fit for idolatrous dogs like your Greeks and your
Romans; survey, through the vista of ages, that thrice-cursed biscuit, with
half a fig, perhaps, by way of garnish, and a huge hammer by its side, to
secure the certainty of mastication, by previous comminution. Then turn
your eyes to a Christian breakfast--hot rolls, eggs, coffee, beef; but
down, down, rebellious visions: we need say no more! You, reader, like
ourselves, will breathe a malediction on the classical era, and thank your
stars for making you a Romanticist. Every morning we thank ours for keeping
us back, and reserving us to an age in which breakfast had been already
invented. In the words of Ovid we say:--

"Prisca juvent alios: ego me nunc denique natum Gratulor. Hæc ætas moribus
apta meis."

Our friend, the Roman cit, has therefore thus far, in his progress through
life, obtained no breakfast, if he ever contemplated an idea so frantic.
But it occurs to you, our faithful reader, that perhaps he will not always
be thus unhappy. We could bring waggon-loads of sentiments, Greek as well
as Roman, which prove, more clearly than the most eminent pikestaff, that,
as the wheel of fortune revolves, simply out of the fact that it has
carried a man downwards, it must subsequently carry him upwards, no matter
what dislike that wheel, or any of its spokes, may bear to that man: "non,
si male nunc sit, et olim sic erit:" and that if a man, through the madness
of his nation, misses coffee and hot rolls at nine, he may easily run into
a leg of mutton at twelve. True it is he may do so: truth is commendable;
and we will not deny that a man may sometimes, by losing a breakfast, gain
a dinner. Such things have been in various ages, and will be again, but not
at Rome. There are reasons against it. We have heard of men who consider
life under the idea of a wilderness--dry as "a remainder biscuit after a
voyage:" and who consider a day under the idea of a little life. Life
is the macrocosm, or world at large; day is the microcosm, or world in
miniature. Consequently, if life is a wilderness, then day, as a little
life, is a little wilderness. And this wilderness can be safely traversed
only by having relays of fountains, or stages for refreshment. Such
stages, they conceive, are found in the several meals which Providence has
stationed at due intervals through the day, whenever the perverseness of
man does not break the chain, or derange the order of succession.

These are the anchors by which man rides in that billowy ocean between
morning and night. The first anchor, viz., breakfast, having given way in
Rome, the more need there is that he should pull up by the second; and
that is often reputed to be dinner. And as your dictionary, good reader,
translated _breakfast_ by that vain word _jentaculum_, so, doubtless, it
will translate _dinner_ by that still vainer word _prandium_. Sincerely we
hope that your own dinner on this day, and through all time coming, may
have a better root in fact and substance than this most visionary of all
baseless things--the Roman _prandium_, of which we shall presently show you
that the most approved translation is _moonshine_.

Reader, we are not jesting here. In the very spirit of serious truth, we
assure you, that the delusion about "jentaculum" is even exceeded by this
other delusion about "prandium." Salmasius himself, for whom a natural
prejudice of place and time partially obscured the truth, admits, however,
that _prandium_ was a meal which the ancients rarely took; his very words
are--"_raro prandebant veteres_." Now, judge for yourself of the good sense
which is shown in translating by the word _dinner_, which must of necessity
mean the chief meal--a Roman word which represents a fancy meal, a meal of
caprice, a meal which few people took. At this moment, what is the single
point of agreement between the noon meal of the English laborer and the
evening meal of the English gentleman? What is the single circumstance
common to both, which causes us to denominate them by the common name of
_dinner_? It is that in both we recognize the _principal_ meal of the
day, the meal upon which is thrown the _onus_ of the day's support. In
everything else they are as wide asunder as the poles; but they agree in
this one point of their function. Is it credible that, to represent such a
meal amongst ourselves, we select a Roman word so notoriously expressing a
mere shadow, a pure apology, that very few people ever tasted it--nobody
sate down to it--not many washed their hands after it, and gradually the
very name of it became interchangeable with another name, implying the
slightest possible act of trying or sipping? "_Post larationem sine mensâ
prandium_," says Seneca, "_post quod non sunt lavandæ manus_;" that is,
"after bathing, I take a _prandium_ without sitting down to table, and such
a _prandium_ as brings after itself no need of washing the hands." No;
moonshine as little soils the hands as it oppresses the stomach.

Reader! we, as well as Pliny, had an uncle, an East Indian uncle; doubtless
you have such an uncle; everybody has an Indian uncle. Generally such a
person is "rather yellow, rather yellow," [to quote Canning _versus_ Lord
Durham:] that is the chief fault with his physics; but, as to his morals,
he is universally a man of princely aspirations and habits. He is not
always so orientally rich as he is reputed; but he is always orientally
munificent. Call upon him at any hour from two to five, he insists on your
taking _tiffin_: and such a tiffin! The English corresponding term is
luncheon: but how meagre a shadow is the European meal to its glowing
Asiatic cousin! Still, gloriously as tiffin shines, does anybody imagine
that it is a vicarious dinner, or ever meant to be the substitute of
dinner? Wait till eight, and you will have your eyes opened on that
subject. So of the Roman _prandium_: had it been as luxurious as it was
simple, still it was always viewed as something meant only to stay the
stomach, as a prologue to something beyond. The _prandium_ was far enough
from giving the feeblest idea of the English luncheon; yet it stood in the
same relation to the Roman day. Now to English_men_ that meal scarcely
exists; and were it not for women, whose delicacy of organization does
not allow them to fast so long as men, would probably be abolished. It is
singular in this, as in other points, how nearly England and ancient Rome
approximate. We all know how hard it is to tempt a man generally into
spoiling his appetite, by eating before dinner. The same dislike of
violating what they called the integrity of the appetite, [_integram
famem_,] existed at Rome. Every man who knows anything of Latin critically,
sees the connection of the word _integer_ with _in_ and _tetigi_: _integer_
means what is _intact_, unviolated by touch. Cicero, when protesting
against spoiling his appetite for dinner, by tasting anything beforehand,
says, _integram famem ad coenam afferam_; I shall bring to dinner an
appetite untampered with. Nay, so much stress did the Romans lay on
maintaining this primitive state of the appetite undisturbed, that any
prelusions with either _jentaculum_ or _prandium_ were said, by a very
strong phrase indeed, _polluere famem_, to pollute the sanctity of the
appetite. The appetite was regarded as a holy vestal flame, soaring upwards
towards dinner throughout the day: if undebauched, it tended to its natural
consummation in _coena_: expired like a phoenix, to rise again out of its
own ashes. On this theory, to which language had accommodated itself, the
two prelusive meals of nine o'clock, A.M., and of one, P.M., so far from
being ratified by the public sense, and adopted into the economy of the
day, were regarded gloomily as gross irregularities, enormities, debauchers
of the natural instinct; and, in so far as they thwarted that instinct,
lessened it, or depraved it, were universally held to be full of pollution;
and, finally, to _profane_ a motion of nature. Such was the language.

But we guess what is passing in the reader's mind. He thinks that all this
proves the _prandium_ to have been a meal of little account; and in very
many cases absolutely unknown. But still he thinks all this might happen to
the English dinner--_that_ might be neglected; supper might be generally
preferred; and, nevertheless, dinner would be as truly entitled to the name
of dinner as before. Many a student neglects his dinner; enthusiasm in any
pursuit must often have extinguished appetite for all of us. Many a time
and oft did this happen to Sir Isaac Newton. Evidence is on record, that
such a deponent at eight o'clock, A.M., found Sir Isaac with one stocking
on, one off; at two, said deponent called him to dinner. Being interrogated
whether Sir Isaac had pulled on the _minus_ stocking, or gartered the
_plus_ stocking, witness replied that he had not. Being asked if Sir Isaac
came to dinner, replied that he did not. Being again asked, "At sunset, did
you look in on Sir Isaac?" Witness replied, "I did." "And now, upon your
conscience, sir, by the virtue of your oath, in what state were the
stockings?" _Ans. "In statu quo ante bellum_." It seems Sir Isaac had
fought through that whole battle of a long day, so trying a campaign to
many people--be had traversed that whole sandy Zaarah, without calling, or
needing to call at one of those fountains, stages, or _mansiones_,[7] by
which (according to our former explanation) Providence has relieved the
continuity of arid soil, which else disfigures that long dreary level. This
happens to all; but was dinner not dinner, and did supper become dinner,
because Sir Isaac Newton ate nothing at the first, and threw the whole
day's support upon the last? No, you will say, a rule is not defeated by
one casual deviation, nor by one person's constant deviation. Everybody
else was still dining at two, though Sir Isaac might not; and Sir Isaac
himself on most days no more deferred his dinner beyond two, than he sate
with one stocking off. But what if everybody, Sir Isaac included, had
deferred his substantial meal until night, and taken a slight refection
only at two? The question put does really represent the very case which has
happened with us in England. In 1700, a large part of London took a meal
at two, P.M., and another at seven or eight, P.M. In 1839, a large part
of London is still doing the very same thing, taking one meal at two, and
another at seven or eight. But the names are entirely changed: the two
o'clock meal used to be called _dinner_, and is now called _luncheon_; the
eight o'clock meal used to be called _supper_, and is now called _dinner_.

Now the question is easily solved: because, upon reviewing the idea of
dinner, we soon perceive that time has little or no connection with it:
since, both in England and France, dinner has travelled, like the hand of a
clock, through _every_ hour between ten, A.M. and ten, P.M. We have a list,
well attested, of every successive hour between these limits having been
the known established hour for the royal dinner-table within the last three
hundred and fifty years. Time, therefore, vanishes from the equation: it is
a quantity as regularly exterminated as in any algebraic problem. The true
elements of the idea, are evidently these:--1. That dinner is that meal, no
matter when taken, which is the principal meal; _i.e._ the meal on which
the day's support is thrown. 2. That it is the meal of hospitality. 3. That
it is the meal (with reference to both Nos 1 and 2) in which animal food
predominates. 4. That it is that meal which, upon necessity arising for the
abolition of all _but_ one, would naturally offer itself as that one. Apply
these four tests to _prandium_:--How could that meal answer to the first
test, as _the day's support_, which few people touched? How could that meal
answer to the second test, as the _meal of hospitality_, at which nobody
sate down? How could that meal answer to the third test, as the meal of
animal food, which consisted exclusively and notoriously of bread? Or to
the fourth test, of the meal _entitled to survive the abolition of the
rest_, which was itself abolished at all times in practice?

Tried, therefore, by every test, _prandium_ vanishes. But we have something
further to communicate about this same _prandium_.

I. It came to pass, by a very natural association of feeling, that
_prandium_ and _jentuculum_, in the latter centuries of Rome, were
generally confounded. This result was inevitable. Both professed the
same basis Both came in the morning. Both were fictions. Hence they were
confounded.

That fact speaks for itself,--breakfast and luncheon never could have been
confounded; but who would be at the pains of distinguishing two shadows? In
a gambling-house of that class, where you are at liberty to sit down to a
splendid banquet, anxiety probably prevents your sitting down at all; but,
if you do, the same cause prevents your noticing what you eat. So of the
two _pseudo_ meals of Rome, they came in the very midst of the Roman
business; viz. from nine, A.M. to two, P.M. Nobody could give his mind
to them, had they been of better quality. There lay one cause of their
vagueness, viz.--in their position. Another cause was, the common basis of
both. Bread was so notoriously the predominating "feature" in each of these
prelusive banquets, that all foreigners at Rome, who communicated with
Romans through the Greek language, knew both the one and the other by the
name of [Greek: artositos], or the _bread repast_. Originally this name
had been restricted to the earlier meal. But a distinction without a
difference could not sustain itself: and both alike disguised their
emptiness under this pompous quadrisyllable. In the identity of substance,
therefore, lay a second ground of confusion. And, then, thirdly, even as
to the time, which had ever been the sole real distinction, there arose
from accident a tendency to converge. For it happened that while some had
_jentaculum_ but no _prandium_, others had _prandium_ but no _jentaculum_;
a third party had both; a fourth party, by much the largest, had neither.
Out of which varieties (who would think that a nonentity could cut up
into so many somethings?) arose a fifth party of compromisers, who,
because they could not afford a regular _coena_, and yet were
hospitably disposed, fused the two ideas into one; and so, because the
usual time for the idea of a breakfast was nine to ten, and for the idea
of a luncheon twelve to one, compromised the rival pretensions by what
diplomatists call a _mezzo termine_; bisecting the time at eleven, and
melting the two ideas into one. But by thus merging the separate times
of each, they abolished the sole real difference that had ever divided
them. Losing that, they lost all.

Perhaps, as two negatives make one affirmative, it may be thought that two
layers of moonshine might coalesce into one pancake; and two Barmecide
banquets might compose one poached egg. Of that the company were the best
judges. But probably, as a rump and dozen, in our land of wagers, is
construed with a very liberal latitude as to the materials, so Martial's
invitation, "to take bread with him at eleven," might be understood by the
[Greek: sunetoi] as significant of something better than
[Greek: artositos]. Otherwise, in good truth, "moonshine and turn-out"
at eleven, A.M., would be even worse than "tea and turn-out" at eight,
P.M., which the "fervida juventus" of young England so loudly detests. But
however that might be, in this convergement of the several frontiers, and
the confusion that ensued, one cannot wonder that, whilst the two bladders
collapsed into one idea, they actually expanded into four names, two Latin
and two Greek, _gustus_ and _gustatio_, [Greek: geusis], and
[Greek: geusma], which all alike express the merely tentative or
exploratory act of a _prægustator_ or professional "taster" in a
king's household: what, if applied to a fluid, we should denominate
sipping.

At last, by so many steps all in one direction, things had come to such
a pass--the two prelusive meals of the Roman morning, each for itself
separately vague from the beginning, had so communicated and interfused
their several and joint vaguenesses, that at last no man knew or cared to
know what any other man included in his idea of either; how much or how
little. And you might as well have hunted in the woods of Ethiopia for
Prester John, or fixed the parish of the everlasting Jew,[8] as have
attempted to say what "jentaculum" might be, or what "prandium." Only one
thing was clear--what they were _not_. Neither was or wished to be anything
that people cared for. They were both empty shadows; but shadows as they
were, we find from Cicero that they had a power of polluting and profaning
better things than themselves.

We presume that no rational man will henceforth look for "dinner"--that
great idea according to Dr. Johnson--that sacred idea according to
Cicero--in a bag of moonshine on one side, or a bag of pollution on
the other. _Prandium_, so far from being what our foolish dictionaries
pretend--dinner itself--never in its palmiest days was more or other than
a miserable attempt at being _luncheon_. It was a _conatus_, what
physiologists call a _nisus_, a struggle in a very ambitious spark,
or _scintilla_, to kindle into a fire. This _nisus_ went on for some
centuries; but finally issued in smoke. If _prandium_ had worked out his
ambition, had "the great stream of tendency" accomplished all his wishes,
_prandium_ never could have been more than a very indifferent luncheon. But
now,

II. We have to offer another fact, ruinous to our dictionaries on another
ground. Various circumstances have disguised the truth, but a truth it is,
that "prandium", in its very origin and _incunabula_, never was a meal
known to the Roman _culina_. In that court it was never recognized except
as an alien. It had no original domicile in the city of Rome. It was a _vot
casfren-sis_, a word and an idea purely martial, and pointing to martial
necessities. Amongst the new ideas proclaimed to the recruit, this was
one--"Look for no '_coenu_', no regular dinner, with us. Resign these
unwarlike notions. It is true that even war has its respites; in these
it would be possible to have our Roman _coena_ with all its equipage of
ministrations. Such luxury untunes the mind for doing and suffering. Let us
voluntarily renounce it; that when a necessity of renouncing it arrives, we
may not feel it among the hardships of war. From the day when you enter the
gates of the camp, reconcile yourself, tyro, to a new fashion of meal, to
what in camp dialect we call _prandium_." This "prandium," this essentially
military meal, was taken standing, by way of symbolizing the necessity of
being always ready for the enemy. Hence the posture in which it was taken
at Rome, the very counter-pole to the luxurious posture of dinner. A writer
of the third century, a period from which the Romans naturally looked back
upon everything connected with their own early habits, and with the same
kind of interest as we extend to our Alfred, (separated from us as Romulus
from them by just a thousand years,) in speaking of _prandium_, says, "Quod
dictum est _parandium_, ab eo quod milites ad bellum _paret_." Isidorus
again says, "Proprie apud veteres prandium vocatum fuisse oinnem militum
cibum ante pugnam;" i.e. "that, properly speaking, amongst our ancestors
every military meal taken before battle was termed _prandium_." According
to Isidore, the proposition is reciprocating, viz., that, as every
_prandium_ was a military meal, so every military meal was called
_prandium_. But, in fact, the reason of that is apparent. Whether in the
camp or the city, the early Romans had probably but one meal in a day. That
is true of many a man amongst ourselves by choice; it is true also, to our
knowledge, of some horse regiments in our service, and may be of all. This
meal was called _coena_, or dinner in the city--_prandium_ in camps. In the
city it would always be tending to one fixed hour. In the camp innumerable
accidents of war would make it very uncertain. On this account it would
be an established rule to celebrate the daily meal at noon, if nothing
hindered; not that a later hour would not have been preferred had the
choice been free; but it was better to have a certainty at a bad hour, than
by waiting for a better hour to make it an uncertainty. For it was a camp
proverb--_Pransus, paratus_; armed with his daily meal, the soldier
is ready for service. It was not, however, that all meals, as Isidore
imagined, were indiscriminately called _prandium_; but that the one sole
meal of the day, by accidents of war, might, and did, revolve through all
hours of the day.

The first introduction of this military meal into Rome itself, would be
through the honorable pedantry of old centurions, &c., delighting (like the
_Trunnions_, &c., of our navy) to keep up in peaceful life some image or
memorial of their past experience, so wild, so full of peril, excitement,
and romance, as Roman warfare must have been in those ages. Many
non-military people for health's sake, many as an excuse for eating early,
many by way of interposing some refreshment between the stages of forensic
business, would adopt this hurried and informal meal. Many would wish to
see their sons adopting such a meal as a training for foreign service in
particular, and for temperance in general. It would also be maintained by a
solemn and very interesting commemoration of this camp repast in Rome.

This commemoration, because it has been grossly misunderstood by Salmasius,
(whose error arose from not marking the true point of a particular
antithesis,) and still more, because it is a distinct confirmation of all
we have said as to the military nature of _prandium_, we shall detach from
the series of our illustrations, by placing it in a separate paragraph.

On a set day the officers of the army were invited by Cæsar to a banquet;
it was a circumstance expressly noticed in the invitation, by the proper
officers of the palace, that the banquet was not a "coena," but a
"prandium." What followed, in consequence? Why, that all the guests sate
down in full military accoutrement; whereas, observes the historian, had it
been a coena, the officers would have unbelted their swords; for, he adds,
even in Cæsar's presence the officers lay aside their swords. The word
_prandium_, in short, converted the palace into the imperial tent; and
Cæsar was no longer a civil emperor and _princeps senatûs_, but became a
commander-in-chief amongst a council of his staff, all belted and plumed,
and in full military fig.

On this principle we come to understand why it is, that, whenever the Latin
poets speak of an army as taking food, the word used is always _prandens_
and _pransus_; and, when the word used is _prandens_, then always it is an
army that is concerned. Thus Juvenal in a well-known satire--

  ----"Credimus altos
  Desiccasse amnes, epotaque ftumina, Medo _Prandente_."

Not _coenante_, observe: you might as well talk of an army taking tea
and toast. Nor is that word ever applied to armies. It is true that the
converse is not so rigorously observed: nor ought it, from the explanations
already given. Though no soldier dined, (_coenabat_,) yet the citizen
sometimes adopted the camp usage and took a _prandium_. But generally the
poets use the word merely to mark the time of day. In that most humorous
appeal of Perseus--"Cur quis non prandeat, hoc est?" "Is this a sufficient
reason for losing one's _prandium_?" He was obliged to say _prandium_,
because no exhibitions ever could cause a man to lose his _coenia_, since
none were displayed at a time of day when anybody in Rome would have
attended. Just as, in alluding to a parliamentary speech notoriously
delivered at midnight, an English satirist must have said, Is this a speech
to furnish an argument for leaving one's bed?--not as what stood foremost
in his regard, but as the only thing that _could_ be lost at the time of
night.

On this principle, also, viz. by going back to the military origin of
_prandium_, we gain the interpretation of all the peculiarities attached to
it; viz.--1, its early hour--2, its being taken in a standing posture--3,
in the open air--4, the humble quality of its materials--bread and biscuit,
(the main articles of military fare.) In all these circumstances of the
meal, we read, most legibly written, the exotic and military character of
the meal.

Thus we have brought down our Roman friend to noonday, or even one hour
later than noon, and to this moment the poor man has had nothing to eat.
For, supposing him to be not _impransus_, and supposing him _jentâsse_
beside; yet it is evident, (we hope,) that neither one nor the other means
more than what it was often called, viz. [Greek: Bouchismos], or, in
plain English, a mouthful. How long do we intend to keep him waiting?
Reader, he will dine at three, or (supposing dinner put off to the latest)
at four. Dinner was never known to be later than the tenth hour in Rome,
which in summer would be past five; but for a far greater proportion of
days would be near four in Rome, except for one or two of the emperors,
whom the mere business attached to their unhappy station kept sometimes
dinnerless till six. And so entirely was a Roman the creature of ceremony,
that a national mourning would probably have been celebrated, and the "sad
augurs" would have been called in to expiate the prodigy, had the general
dinner lingered beyond four.

But, meantime, what has our friend been about since perhaps six or seven in
the morning? After paying his little homage to his _patronus_, in what
way has he fought with the great enemy Time since then? Why, reader, this
illustrates one of the most interesting features in the Roman character.
The Roman was the idlest of men. "Man and boy," he was "an idler in the
land." He called himself and his pals "rerum dominos, gentemque togatam;"
_the gentry that wore the toga_. Yes, and a pretty affair that "toga" was.
Just figure to yourself, reader, the picture of a hardworking man, with
horny hands like our hedgers, ditchers, weavers, porters, &c., setting to
work on the highroad in that vast sweeping toga, filling with a strong
gale like the mainsail of a frigate. Conceive the roars with which this
magnificent figure would be received into the bosom of a poor-house
detachment sent out to attack the stones on some new line of road, or a
fatigue party of dustmen sent upon secret service. Had there been nothing
left as a memorial of the Romans but that one relic--their immeasurable
toga,[9]--we should have known that they were born and bred to idleness. In
fact, except in war, the Roman never did anything at all but sun himself.
_Ut se apricaret_ was the final cause of peace in his opinion; in literal
truth, that he might make an _apricot_ of himself. The public rations at
all times supported the poorest inhabitant of Rome if he were a citizen.
Hence it was that Hadrian was so astonished with the spectacle of
Alexandria, "_civitas opulenta, fæcunda, in qua nemo vivat otiosus_." Here
first he saw the spectacle of a vast city, second only to Rome, where every
man had something to do; "_podagrosi quod agant habent; habent cæci quod
faciant; ne chiragrici_" (those with gout in the fingers) "_apud eos otiosi
vivunt_." No poor rates levied upon the rest of the world for the benefit
of their own paupers were there distributed _gratis_. The prodigious
spectacle (so it seemed to Hadrian) was exhibited in Alexandria, of all men
earning their bread in the sweat of their brow. In Rome only, (and at one
time in some of the Grecian states,) it was the very meaning of _citizen_
that he could vote and be idle.

In these circumstances, where the whole sum of life's duties amounted
to voting, all the business a man _could_ have was to attend the public
assemblies, electioneering, or factious. These, and any judicial trial
(public or private) that might happen to interest him for the persons
concerned, or for the questions, amused him through the morning; that
is, from eight till one. He might also extract some diversion from
the _columnæ_, or pillars of certain porticoes to which they pasted
advertisements. These _affiches_ must have been numerous; for all the girls
in Rome who lost a trinket, or a pet bird, or a lap-dog, took this mode of
angling in the great ocean of the public for the missing articles.

But all this time we take for granted that there were no shows in a course
of exhibition, either the dreadful ones of the amphitheatre, or the
bloodless ones of the circus. If there were, then that became the business
of all Romans; and it was a business which would have occupied him from
daylight until the light began to fail. Here we see another effect from the
scarcity of artificial light amongst the ancients. These magnificent shows
went on by daylight. But how incomparably greater would have been the
splendor by lamp-light! What a gigantic conception! Eighty thousand human
faces all revealed under one blaze of lamp-light! Lord Bacon saw the mighty
advantage of candle-light for the pomps and glories of this world. But the
poverty of the earth was the ultimate cause that the Pagan shows proceeded
by day. Not that the masters of the world, who rained Arabian odors and
perfumed waters of the most costly description from a thousand fountains,
simply to cool the summer heats, would have regarded the expense of light;
cedar and other odorous woods burning upon vast altars, together with every
variety of fragrant torch, would have created light enough to shed a new
day over the distant Adriatic.

However, as there are no public spectacles, we will suppose, and the courts
or political meetings, (if not closed altogether by superstition,) would at
any rate be closed in the ordinary course by twelve or one o'clock, nothing
remains for him to do, before returning home, except perhaps to attend the
_palæstra_, or some public recitation of a poem written by a friend, but in
any case to attend the public baths. For these the time varied; and many
people have thought it tyrannical in some of the Cæsars that they imposed
restraints on the time open for the baths; some, for instance, would not
suffer them to open at all before two, and in any case, if you were later
than four or five in summer, you would have to pay a fine which most
effectually cleaned out the baths of all raff, since it was a sum that
_John Quires_ could not have produced to save his life. But it should be
considered that the emperor was the steward of the public resources for
maintaining the baths in fuel, oil, attendance, repairs. We are prepared
to show, on a fitting occasion, that every fourth person[10] amongst the
citizens bathed daily, and non-citizens, of course, paid an _extra_ sum.
Now the population of Rome was far larger than has ever been hinted at
except by Lipsius. But certain it is, that during the long peace of the
first Cæsars, and after the _annonaria prorisio_, (that great pledge of
popularity to a Roman prince,) had been increased by the corn tribute from
the Nile, the Roman population took an immense lurch ahead. The subsequent
increase of baths, whilst no old ones were neglected, proves _that_
decisively. And as citizenship expanded by means of the easy terms on which
it could be had, so did the bathers multiply. The population of Rome in the
century after Augustus, was far greater than during that era; and this,
still acting as a vortex to the rest of the world, may have been one great
motive with Constantine for "transferring" the capital eastwards; in
reality, for breaking up one monster capital into two of more manageable
dimensions. Two o'clock was often the earliest hour at which the public
baths were opened. But in Martial's time a man could go without blushing
(_salvâ fronte_) at eleven, though even then two o'clock was the meridian
hour for the great uproar of splashing, and swimming, and "larking" in the
endless baths of endless Rome.

And now, at last, bathing finished, and the exercises of the _palæstra_, at
half-past two, or three, our friend finds his way home--not again to leave
it for that day. He is now a new man; refreshed, oiled with perfumes, his
dust washed off by hot water, and ready for enjoyment. These were the
things that determined the time for dinner. Had there been no other proof
that _coena_ was the Roman dinner, this is an ample one. Now first the
Roman was fit for dinner, in a condition of luxurious ease; business
ever--that day's load of anxiety laid aside--his _cuticle_, as he delighted
to talk, cleansed and polished--nothing more to do or to think of until
the next morning, he might now go and dine, and get drunk with a safe
conscience. Besides, if he does not get dinner now, when will he get it?
For most demonstrably he has taken nothing yet which comes near in value
to that basin of soup which many of ourselves take at the Roman hour of
bathing. No; we have kept our man fasting as yet. It is to be hoped that
something is coming at last.

It _does_ come,--dinner, the great meal of "coena;" the meal sacred to
hospitality and genial pleasure, comes now to fill up the rest of the day,
until light fails altogether.

Many people are of opinion that the Romans only understood what the
capabilities of dinner were. It is certain that they were the first great
people that discovered the true secret and meaning of dinner, the great
office which it fulfils, and which we in England are now so generally
acting on. Barbarous nations,--and none were, in that respect, more
barbarous than our own ancestors,--made this capital blunder; the brutes,
if you asked them what was the use of dinner, what it was meant for, stared
at you and replied--as a horse would reply if you put the same question
about his provender--that it was to give him strength for finishing his
work! Therefore, if you point your telescope back to antiquity about twelve
or one o'clock in the daytime, you will descry our most worthy ancestors
all eating for their very lives, eating as dogs eat, viz. in bodily fear
that some other dog will come and take their dinner away. What swelling of
the veins in the temples! (see Boswell's natural history of Dr. Johnson at
dinner;) what intense and rapid deglutition! what odious clatter of knives
and plates! what silence of the human voice! what gravity! what fury in the
libidinous eyes with which they contemplate the dishes! Positively it was
an _indecent_ spectacle to see Dr. Johnson at dinner. But, above all, what
maniacal haste and hurry, as if the fiend were waiting with red-hot pincers
to lay hold of the hindermost!

Oh, reader, do you recognize in this abominable picture your respected
ancestors and ours? Excuse us for saying--"What monsters!" We have a right
to call our own ancestors monsters; and, if so, we must have the same right
over yours. For Dr. Southey has shown plainly in the "Doctor," that every
man having four grand parents in the second stage of ascent, (each of whom
having four, therefore,) sixteen in the third, and so on, long before you
get to the Conquest, every man and woman then living in England will be
wanted to make up the sum of my separate ancestors; consequently, you must
take your ancestors out of the very same fund, or (if you are too proud for
that) you must go without ancestors. So that, your ancestors being clearly
mine, I have a right in law to call the whole "kit" of them monsters. _Quod
erat demonstrandum_. Really and upon our honor, it makes one, for the
moment, ashamed of one's descent; one would wish to disinherit one's-self
backwards, and (as Sheridan says in the _Rivals_) to "cut the connection."
Wordsworth has an admirable picture in Peter Bell of "A snug party in a
parlor," removed into _limbus patrum_ for their offences in the flesh:--

  "Cramming, as they on earth were cramm'd;
  All sipping wine, all sipping tea;
  But, as you by their faces see,
  All silent, and all d--d."

How well does that one word describe those venerable ancestral
dinners--"All silent!" Contrast this infernal silence of voice and fury
of eye with the "risus amabilis," the festivity, the social kindness, the
music, the wine, the "dulcis insania," of a Roman "coena." We mentioned
four tests for determining what meal is, and what is not, dinner; we may
now add a fifth, viz. the spirit of festal joy and elegant enjoyment, of
anxiety laid aside, and of honorable social pleasure put on like a marriage
garment.

And what caused the difference between our ancestors and the Romans? Simply
this--the error of interposing dinner in the middle of business, thus
courting all the breezes of angry feeling that may happen to blow from the
business yet to come, instead of finishing, absolutely closing, the account
with this world's troubles before you sit down. That unhappy interpolation
ruined all. Dinner was an ugly little parenthesis between two still uglier
clauses of a tee-totally ugly sentence. Whereas with us, their enlightened
posterity, to whom they have the honor to be ancestors, dinner is a great
reaction. There lies our conception of the matter. It grew out of the very
excess of the evil. When business was moderate, dinner was allowed to
divide and bisect it. When it swelled into that vast strife and agony, as
one may call it, that boils along the tortured streets of modern London or
other capitals, men began to see the necessity of an adequate counterforce
to push against this overwhelming torrent, and thus maintain the
equilibrium. Were it not for the soft relief of a six o'clock dinner, the
gentle manner succeeding to the boisterous hubbub of the day, the soft
glowing lights, the wine, the intellectual conversation, life in London is
now come to such a pass, that in two years all nerves would sink before it.
But for this periodic reaction, the modern business which draws so cruelly
on the brain, and so little on the hands, would overthrow that organ in
all but those of coarse organization. Dinner it is,--meaning by dinner
the whole complexity of attendant circumstances,--which saves the modern
brain-working men from going mad.

This revolution as to dinner was the greatest in virtue and value ever
accomplished. In fact, those are always the most operative revolutions
which are brought about through social or domestic changes. A nation must
be barbarous, neither could it have much intellectual business, which dined
in the morning. They could not be at ease in the morning. So much must be
granted: every day has its separate _quantum_, its dose (as the doctrinists
of rent phrase it) of anxiety, that could not be digested so soon as noon.
No man will say it. He, therefore, who dined at noon, was willing to sit
down squalid as he was, with his dress unchanged, his cares not washed off.
And what follows from that? Why, that to him, to such a canine or cynical
specimen of the genus _homo_, dinner existed only as a physical event, a
mere animal relief, a mere carnal enjoyment. For what, we demand, did this
fleshly creature differ from the carrion crow, or the kite, or the vulture,
or the cormorant? A French judge, in an action upon a wager, laid it down
in law, that man only had a _bouche_, all other animals had a _gueule_:
only with regard to the horse, in consideration of his beauty, nobility,
use, and in honor of the respect with which man regarded him, by the
courtesy of Christendom, he might be allowed to have a _bouche_, and his
reproach of brutality, if not taken away, might thus be hidden. But surely,
of the rabid animal who is caught dining at noonday, the _homo ferus_, who
affronts the meridian sun like Thyestes and Atreus, by his inhuman meals,
we are, by parity of reason, entitled to say, that he has a "maw," (so has
Milton's Death,) but nothing resembling stomach. And to this vile man a
philosopher would say--"Go away, sir, and come back to me two or three
centuries hence, when you have learned to be a reasonable creature, and to
make that physico-intellectual thing out of dinner which it was meant to
be, and is capable of becoming." In Henry VII.'s time the court dined at
eleven in the forenoon. But even that hour was considered so shockingly
late in the French court, that Louis XII. actually had his gray hairs
brought down with sorrow to the grave, by changing his regular hour of
half-past nine for eleven, in gallantry to his young English bride.[11] He
fell a victim to late hours in the forenoon. In Cromwell's time they dined
at one, P.M. One century and a half had carried them on by two hours.
Doubtless, old cooks and scullions wondered what the world would come to
next. Our French neighbors were in the same predicament. But they far
surpassed us in veneration for the meal. They actually dated from it.
Dinner constituted the great era of the day. _L'apres diner_ is almost the
sole date which you find in Cardinal De Retz's memoirs of the _Fronde_.
Dinner was their _Hegira_--dinner was their _line_ in traversing the ocean
of day: they crossed the equator when they dined. Our English revolution
came next; it made some little difference, we have heard people say, in
Church and State; but its great effects were perceived in dinner. People
now dined at two. So dined Addison for his last thirty years; so dined
Pope, who was coeval with the revolution through his entire life. Precisely
as the rebellion of 1745 arose, did people (but observe, very great people)
advance to four, P.M. Philosophers, who watch the "semina rerum," and the
first symptoms of change, had perceived this alteration singing in the
upper air like a coming storm some little time before. About the year 1740,
Pope complains to a friend of Lady Suffolk's dining so late as four. Young
people may bear those things, he observes; but as to himself, now turned
of fifty, if such doings went on, if Lady Suffolk would adopt such strange
hours, he must really absent himself from Marble Hill. Lady Suffolk had a
right to please herself: he himself loved her. But if she would persist,
all which remained for a decayed poet was respectfully to "cut his stick,
and retire." Whether Pope ever put up with four o'clock dinners again, we
have vainly sought to fathom. Some things advance continuously, like a
flood or a fire, which always make an end of A, eat and digest it, before
they go on to B. Other things advance _per saltum_--they do not silently
cancer their way onwards, but lie as still as a snake after they have made
some notable conquest, then when unobserved they make themselves up "for
mischief," and take a flying bound onwards. Thus advanced dinner, and by
these fits got into the territory of evening. And ever as it made a motion
onwards, it found the nation more civilized, (else the change would not
have been effected,) and raised them to a still higher civilization. The
next relay on that line of road, the next repeating frigate, is Cowper in
his poem on _Conversation_. He speaks of four o'clock as still the elegant
hour for dinner--the hour for the _lautiores_ and the _lepidi homines_. Now
this was written about 1780, or a little earlier; perhaps, therefore,
just one generation after Pope's Lady Suffolk. But then Cowper was living
amongst the rural gentry, not in high life; yet, again, Cowper was nearly
connected by blood with the eminent Whig house of Cowper, and acknowledged
as a _kinsman_. About twenty-five years after this, we may take Oxford as
a good exponent of the national advance. As a magnificent body of
"foundations," endowed by kings, and resorted to by the flower of the
national youth, Oxford is always elegant and even splendid in her habits.
Yet, on the other hand, as a grave seat of learning, and feeling the weight
of her position in the commonwealth, she is slow to move: she is inert as
she should be, having the functions of _resistance_ assigned to her against
the popular instinct of _movement_. Now, in Oxford, about 1804-5, there was
a general move in the dinner hour. Those colleges who dined at three, of
which there were still several, now dined at four; those who had dined
at four, now translated their hour to five. These continued good general
hours, but still amongst the more intellectual orders, till about Waterloo.
After that era, six, which had been somewhat of a gala hour, was promoted
to the fixed station of dinner-time in ordinary; and there perhaps it will
rest through centuries. For a more festal dinner, seven, eight, nine, ten,
have all been in requisition since then; but we have not yet heard of any
man's dining later than 10, P.M., except in that single classical instance
(so well remembered from our father Joe) of an Irishman who must have dined
_much_ later than ten, because his servant protested, when others were
enforcing the dignity of their masters by the lateness of their dinner
hours, that _his_ master dined "to-morrow."

Were the Romans not as barbarous as our own ancestors at one time? Most
certainly they were; in their primitive ages they took their _coena_ at
noon,[12] _that_ was before they had laid aside their barbarism; before
they shaved: it was during their barbarism, and in consequence of their
barbarism, that they timed their _coena_ thus unseasonably. And this is
made evident by the fact, that, so long as they erred in the hour, they
erred in the attending circumstances. At this period they had no music
at dinner, no festal graces, and no reposing upon sofas. They sate bolt
upright in chairs, and were as grave as our ancestors, as rabid, and
doubtless as furiously in haste.

With us the revolution has been equally complex. We do not, indeed, adopt
the luxurious attitude of semi-recumbency; our climate makes that less
requisite; and, moreover, the Romans had no knives and forks, which could
scarcely be used in that posture: they ate with their fingers from dishes
already cut up--whence the peculiar force of Seneca's "post quod non sunt
lavandæ manus." But exactly in proportion as our dinner has advanced
towards evening, have we and has that advanced in circumstances of
elegance, of taste, of intellectual value." That by itself would be much.
Infinite would be the gain for any people that it had ceased to be
brutal, animal, fleshly; ceased to regard the chief meal of the day as a
ministration only to an animal necessity; that they had raised it to a far
higher standard; associated it with social and humanizing feelings,
with manners, with graces both moral and intellectual; moral in the
self-restraint; intellectual in the fact, notorious to all men, that the
chief arenas for the _easy_ display of intellectual power are at our dinner
tables. But dinner has _now_ even a greater function than this; as the
fervor of our day's business increases, dinner is continually more needed
in its office of a great _reaction_. We repeat that, at this moment, but
for the daily relief of dinner, the brain of all men who mix in the strife
of capitals would be unhinged and thrown off its centre.

If we should suppose the case of a nation taking three equidistant meals
all of the same material and the same quantity, all milk, for instance, it
would be impossible for Thomas Aquinas himself to say which was or was not
dinner. The case would be that of the Roman _ancile_ which dropped from
the skies; to prevent its ever being stolen, the priests made eleven
_facsimiles_ of it, that the thief, seeing the hopelessness of
distinguishing the true one, might let all alone. And the result was, that,
in the next generation, nobody could point to the true one. But our dinner,
the Roman _coena_, is distinguished from the rest by far more than the
hour; it is distinguished by great functions, and by still greater
capacities. It _is_ most beneficial; it may become more so.

In saying this, we point to the lighter graces of music, and conversation
_more varied_, by which the Roman _coena_ was chiefly distinguished from
our dinner. We are far from agreeing with Mr. Croly, that the Roman meal
was more "intellectual" than ours. On the contrary, ours is the more
intellectual by much; we have far greater knowledge, far greater means
for making it such. In fact, the fault of our meal is--that it is _too_
intellectual; of too severe a character; too political; too much tending,
in many hands, to disquisition. Reciprocation of question and answer,
variety of topics, shifting of topics, are points not sufficiently
cultivated. In all else we assent to the following passage from Mr. Croly's
eloquent Salathiel:--

"If an ancient Roman could start from his slumber into the midst of
European life, he must look with scorn on its absence of grace, elegance,
and fancy. But it is in its festivity, and most of all in its banquets,
that he would feel the incurable barbarism of the Gothic blood. Contrasted
with the fine displays that made the table of the Roman noble a picture,
and threw over the indulgence of appetite the colors of the imagination,
with what eyes must he contemplate the tasteless and commonplace dress,
the coarse attendants, the meagre ornament, the want of mirth, music, and
intellectual interest--the whole heavy machinery that converts the feast
into the mere drudgery of devouring!"

Thus far the reader knows already that we dissent violently; and by looking
back he will see a picture of our ancestors at dinner, in which they
rehearse the very part in relation to ourselves that Mr. Croly supposes
all moderns to rehearse in relation to the Romans; but in the rest of the
beautiful description, the positive, though not the comparative part, we
must all concur:--

"The guests before me were fifty or sixty splendidly dressed men,"
(they were in fact Titus and his staff, then occupied with the siege of
Jerusalem,) "attended by a crowd of domestics, attired with scarcely less
splendor; for no man thought of coming to the banquet in the robes of
ordinary life. The embroidered couches, themselves striking objects,
allowed the ease of position at once delightful in the relaxing climates of
the South, and capable of combining with every grace of the human figure.
At a slight distance, the table loaded with plate glittering under a
profusion of lamps, and surrounded by couches thus covered by rich
draperies, was like a central source of light radiating in broad shafts of
every brilliant hue. The wealth of the patricians, and their intercourse
with the Greeks, made them masters of the first performances of the arts.
Copies of the most famous statues, and groups of sculpture in the precious
metals; trophies of victories; models of temples; were mingled with vases
of flowers and lighted perfumes. Finally, covering and closing all, was
a vast scarlet canopy, which combined the groups beneath to the eye, and
threw the whole into the form that a painter would love."

Mr. Croly then goes on to insist on the intellectual embellishments of the
Roman dinner; their variety, their grace, their adaptation to a festive
purpose. The truth is, our English imagination, more profound than the
Roman, is also more gloomy, less gay, less _riante_. That accounts for our
want of the gorgeous _trictinium_, with its scarlet draperies, and for many
other differences both to the eye and to the understanding. But both we and
the Romans agree in the main point; we both discovered the true purpose
which dinner might serve,--1, to throw the grace of intellectual enjoyment
over an animal necessity; 2, to relieve and antagonize the toil of brain
incident to high forms of social life.

Our object has been to point the eye to this fact; to show uses imperfectly
suspected in a recurring accident of life; to show a steady tendency to
that consummation, by holding up, as in a mirror, (together with occasional
glimpses of hidden corners in history,) the corresponding revolution
silently going on in a great people of antiquity.

Some twenty or more years before I matriculated at Oxford, Mr. Palmer,
at that time M.P. for Bath, had accomplished two things, very hard to
do on our little planet, the Earth, however cheap they may be held by
eccentric people in comets: he had invented mail-coaches, and he had
married the daughter of a duke. He was, therefore, just twice as great
a man as Galileo, who did certainly invent (or, which is the same thing,
[Footnote: "_The same thing_":--Thus, in the calendar of the Church
Festivals, the discovery of the true cross (by Helen, the mother
of Constantine) is recorded (and, one might think, with the express
consciousness of sarcasm) as the _Invention_ of the Cross.] discover)
the satellites of Jupiter, those very next things extant to mail-coaches
in the two capital pretensions of speed and keeping time, but, on the
other hand, who did _not_ marry the daughter of a duke.

These mail-coaches, as organised by Mr. Palmer, are entitled to a
circumstantial notice from myself, having had so large a share in
developing the anarchies of my subsequent dreams: an agency which they
accomplished, 1st, through velocity at that time unprecedented--for they
first revealed the glory of motion; 2dly, through grand effects for
the eye between lamplight and the darkness upon solitary roads; 3dly,
through animal beauty and power so often displayed in the class of
horses selected for this mail service; 4thly, through the conscious
presence of a central intellect, that, in the midst of vast distances
[Footnote: "Vast distances":--One case was familiar to mail-coach
travellers where two mails in opposite directions, north and south,
starting at the same minute from points six hundred miles apart, met
almost constantly at a particular bridge which bisected the total
distance.]--of storms, of darkness, of danger--overruled all obstacles
into one steady co-operation to a national result. For my own feeling,
this post-office service spoke as by some mighty orchestra, where a
thousand instruments, all disregarding each other, and so far in danger
of discord, yet all obedient as slaves to the supreme _baton_ of some
great leader, terminate in a perfection of harmony like that of heart,
brain, and lungs in a healthy animal organisation. But, finally, that
particular element in this whole combination which most impressed
myself, and through which it is that to this hour Mr. Palmer's
mail-coach system tyrannises over my dreams by terror and terrific
beauty, lay in the awful _political_ mission which at that time it
fulfilled. The mail-coach it was that distributed over the face of the
land, like the opening of apocalyptic vials, the heart-shaking news
of Trafalgar, of Salamanca, of Vittoria, of Waterloo. These were the
harvests that, in the grandeur of their reaping, redeemed the tears and
blood in which they had been sown. Neither was the meanest peasant
so much below the grandeur and the sorrow of the times as to confound
battles such as these, which were gradually moulding the destinies of
Christendom, with the vulgar conflicts of ordinary warfare, so often
no more than gladiatorial trials of national prowess. The victories of
England in this stupendous contest rose of themselves as natural _Te
Deums_ to heaven; and it was felt by the thoughtful that such victories,
at such a crisis of general prostration, were not more beneficial to
ourselves than finally to France, our enemy, and to the nations of all
western or central Europe, through whose pusillanimity it was that the
French domination had prospered.

The mail-coach, as the national organ for publishing these mighty
events, thus diffusively influential, became itself a spiritualised and
glorified object to an impassioned heart; and naturally, in the Oxford
of that day, _all_ hearts were impassioned, as being all (or nearly all)
in _early_ manhood. In most universities there is one single college;
in Oxford there were five-and-twenty, all of which were peopled by young
men, the _élite_ of their own generation; not boys, but men: none
under eighteen. In some of these many colleges the custom permitted the
student to keep what are called "short terms"; that is, the four terms
of Michaelmas, Lent, Easter, and Act, were kept by a residence, in the
aggregate, of ninety-one days, or thirteen weeks. Under this interrupted
residence, it was possible that a student might have a reason for going
down to his home four times in the year. This made eight journeys to
and fro. But, as these homes lay dispersed through all the shires of the
island, and most of us disdained all coaches except his Majesty's mail,
no city out of London could pretend to so extensive a connexion with Mr.
Palmer's establishment as Oxford. Three mails, at the least, I remember
as passing every day through Oxford, and benefiting by my personal
patronage--viz., the Worcester, the Gloucester, and the Holyhead mail.
Naturally, therefore, it became a point of some interest with us, whose
journeys revolved every six weeks on an average, to look a little into
the executive details of the system. With some of these Mr. Palmer had
no concern; they rested upon bye-laws enacted by posting-houses for
their own benefit, and upon other bye-laws, equally stern, enacted
by the inside passengers for the illustration of their own haughty
exclusiveness. These last were of a nature to rouse our scorn; from
which the transition was not very long to systematic mutiny. Up to this
time, say 1804, or 1805 (the year of Trafalgar), it had been the fixed
assumption of the four inside people (as an old tradition of all
public carriages derived from the reign of Charles II) that they, the
illustrious quaternion, constituted a porcelain variety of the human
race, whose dignity would have been compromised by exchanging one word
of civility with the three miserable delf-ware outsides. Even to have
kicked an outsider might have been held to attaint the foot concerned
in that operation, so that, perhaps, it would have required an act
of Parliament to restore its purity of blood. What words, then, could
express the horror, and the sense of treason, in that case, which _had_
happened, where all three outsides (the trinity of Pariahs) made a vain
attempt to sit down at the same breakfast-table or dinner-table with
the consecrated four? I myself witnessed such an attempt; and on that
occasion a benevolent old gentleman endeavoured to soothe his three holy
associates, by suggesting that, if the outsides were indicted for this
criminal attempt at the next assizes, the court would regard it as a
case of lunacy or _delirium tremens_ rather than of treason. England
owes much of her grandeur to the depth of the aristocratic element in
her social composition, when pulling against her strong democracy. I
am not the man to laugh at it. But sometimes, undoubtedly, it expressed
itself in comic shapes. The course taken with the infatuated outsiders,
in the particular attempt which I have noticed, was that the waiter,
beckoning them away from the privileged _salle-à-manger_, sang out,
"This way, my good men," and then enticed these good men away to the
kitchen. But that plan had not always answered. Sometimes, though
rarely, cases occurred where the intruders, being stronger than usual,
or more vicious than usual, resolutely refused to budge, and so far
carried their point as to have a separate table arranged for themselves
in a corner of the general room. Yet, if an Indian screen could be found
ample enough to plant them out from the very eyes of the high table, or
_dais_, it then became possible to assume as a fiction of law that the
three delf fellows, after all, were not present. They could be ignored
by the porcelain men, under the maxim that objects not appearing and
objects not existing are governed by the same logical construction.
[Footnote: _De non apparentibus_, etc.]

Such being, at that time, the usage of mail-coaches, what was to be done
by us of young Oxford? We, the most aristocratic of people, who were
addicted to the practice of looking down superciliously even upon the
insides themselves as often very questionable characters--were we,
by voluntarily going outside, to court indignities? If our dress and
bearing sheltered us generally from the suspicion of being "raff"
(the name at that period for "snobs" [Footnote: "_Snobs_," and its
antithesis, "_nobs_," arose among the internal factions of shoemakers
perhaps ten years later. Possibly enough, the terms may have existed
much earlier; but they were then first made known, picturesquely and
effectively, by a trial at some assizes which happened to fix the public
attention.]), we really _were_ such constructively by the place we
assumed. If we did not submit to the deep shadow of eclipse, we entered
at least the skirts of its penumbra. And the analogy of theatres was
valid against us,--where no man can complain of the annoyances incident
to the pit or gallery, having his instant remedy in paying the higher
price of the boxes. But the soundness of this analogy we disputed.
In the case of the theatre, it cannot be pretended that the inferior
situations have any separate attractions, unless the pit may be supposed
to have an advantage for the purposes of the critic or the dramatic
reporter. But the critic or reporter is a rarity. For most people, the
sole benefit is in the price. Now, on the contrary, the outside of the
mail had its own incommunicable advantages. These we could not forego.
The higher price we would willingly have paid, but not the price
connected with the condition of riding inside; which condition we
pronounced insufferable. The air, the freedom of prospect, the proximity
to the horses, the elevation of seat: these were what we required;
but, above all, the certain anticipation of purchasing occasional
opportunities of driving.

Such was the difficulty which pressed us; and under the coercion of this
difficulty we instituted a searching inquiry into the true quality and
valuation of the different apartments about the mail. We conducted
this inquiry on metaphysical principles; and it was ascertained
satisfactorily that the roof of the coach, which by some weak men had
been called the attics, and by some the garrets, was in reality the
drawing-room; in which drawing-room the box was the chief ottoman or
sofa; whilst it appeared that the _inside_ which had been traditionally
regarded as the only room tenantable by gentlemen, was, in fact, the
coal-cellar in disguise.

Great wits jump. The very same idea had not long before struck the
celestial intellect of China. Amongst the presents carried out by our
first embassy to that country was a state-coach. It had been specially
selected as a personal gift by George III; but the exact mode of
using it was an intense mystery to Pekin. The ambassador, indeed (Lord
Macartney), had made some imperfect explanations upon this point; but,
as His Excellency communicated these in a diplomatic whisper at the
very moment of his departure, the celestial intellect was very feebly
illuminated, and it became necessary to call a cabinet council on the
grand state question, "Where was the Emperor to sit?" The hammer-cloth
happened to be unusually gorgeous; and, partly on that consideration,
but partly also because the box offered the most elevated seat, was
nearest to the moon, and undeniably went foremost, it was resolved by
acclamation that the box was the imperial throne, and, for the scoundrel
who drove,--he might sit where he could find a perch. The horses,
therefore, being harnessed, solemnly his imperial majesty ascended his
new English throne under a flourish of trumpets, having the first lord
of the treasury on his right hand, and the chief jester on his left.
Pekin gloried in the spectacle; and in the whole flowery people,
constructively present by representation, there was but one discontented
person, and _that_ was the coachman. This mutinous individual
audaciously shouted, "Where am _I_ to sit?" But the privy council,
incensed by his disloyalty, unanimously opened the door, and kicked him
into the inside. He had all the inside places to himself; but such is
the rapacity of ambition that he was still dissatisfied. "I say," he
cried out in an extempore petition addressed to the Emperor through the
window--"I say, how am I to catch hold of the reins?"--"Anyhow," was the
imperial answer; "don't trouble _me_, man, in my glory. How catch
the reins? Why, through the windows, through the keyholes--_anyhow_."
Finally this contumacious coachman lengthened the check-strings into a
sort of jury-reins communicating with the horses; with these he drove
as steadily as Pekin had any right to expect. The Emperor returned after
the briefest of circuits; he descended in great pomp from his throne,
with the severest resolution never to remount it. A public thanksgiving
was ordered for his majesty's happy escape from the disease of a broken
neck; and the state-coach was dedicated thenceforward as a votive
offering to the god Fo Fo--whom the learned more accurately called Fi
Fi.

A revolution of this same Chinese character did young Oxford of that
era effect in the constitution of mail-coach society. It was a perfect
French Revolution; and we had good reason to say, _ça ira_. In fact,
it soon became _too_ popular. The "public"--a well-known character,
particularly disagreeable, though slightly respectable, and notorious
for affecting the chief seats in synagogues--had at first loudly
opposed this revolution; but, when the opposition showed itself to be
ineffectual, our disagreeable friend went into it with headlong zeal.
At first it was a sort of race between us; and, as the public is usually
from thirty to fifty years old, naturally we of young Oxford, that
averaged about twenty, had the advantage. Then the public took to
bribing, giving fees to horse-keepers, &c., who hired out their persons
as warming-pans on the box seat. _That_, you know, was shocking to all
moral sensibilities. Come to bribery, said we, and there is an end
to all morality,--Aristotle's, Zeno's, Cicero's, or anybody's. And,
besides, of what use was it? For _we_ bribed also. And, as our bribes,
to those of the public, were as five shillings to sixpence, here again
young Oxford had the advantage. But the contest was ruinous to
the principles of the stables connected with the mails. This whole
corporation was constantly bribed, rebribed, and often surrebribed; a
mail-coach yard was like the hustings in a contested election; and a
horse-keeper, ostler, or helper, was held by the philosophical at that
time to be the most corrupt character in the nation.

There was an impression upon the public mind, natural enough from the
continually augmenting velocity of the mail, but quite erroneous, that
an outside seat on this class of carriages was a post of danger. On the
contrary, I maintained that, if a man had become nervous from some
gipsy prediction in his childhood, allocating to a particular moon
now approaching some unknown danger, and he should inquire earnestly,
"Whither can I fly for shelter? Is a prison the safest retreat? or a
lunatic hospital? or the British Museum?" I should have replied, "Oh no;
I'll tell you what to do. Take lodgings for the next forty days on the
box of his Majesty's mail. Nobody can touch you there. If it is by
bills at ninety days after date that you are made unhappy--if noters and
protesters are the sort of wretches whose astrological shadows darken
the house of life--then note you what I vehemently protest: viz., that,
no matter though the sheriff and under-sheriff in every county should be
running after you with his _posse_, touch a hair of your head he cannot
whilst you keep house and have your legal domicile on the box of the
mail. It is felony to stop the mail; even the sheriff cannot do that.
And an _extra_ touch of the whip to the leaders (no great matter if
it grazes the sheriff) at any time guarantees your safety." In fact, a
bedroom in a quiet house seems a safe enough retreat; yet it is liable
to its own notorious nuisances--to robbers by night, to rats, to fire.
But the mail laughs at these terrors. To robbers, the answer is packed
up and ready for delivery in the barrel of the guard's blunderbuss. Rats
again! there _are_ none about mail-coaches any more than snakes in Von
Troil's Iceland; [Footnote: "_Von Troil's Iceland_":--The allusion is
to a well-known chapter in Von Troil's work, entitled, "Concerning
the Snakes of Iceland." The entire chapter consists of these six
words--"_There art no snakes in Iceland_."] except, indeed, now and then
a parliamentary rat, who always hides his shame in what I have shown
to be the "coal-cellar." And, as to fire, I never knew but one in a
mail-coach; which was in the Exeter mail, and caused by an obstinate
sailor bound to Devonport. Jack, making light of the law and the
lawgiver that had set their faces against his offence, insisted on
taking up a forbidden seat [Footnote: "_Forbidden seat_":--The very
sternest code of rules was enforced upon the mails by the Post-office.
Throughout England, only three outsides were allowed, of whom one was
to sit on the box, and the other two immediately behind the box; none,
under any pretext, to come near the guard; an indispensable caution;
since else, under the guise of a passenger, a robber might by any one
of a thousand advantages--which sometimes are created, but always are
favoured, by the animation of frank social intercourse--have disarmed
the guard. Beyond the Scottish border, the regulation was so far relaxed
as to allow of _four_ outsides, but not relaxed at all as to the mode of
placing them. One, as before, was seated on the box, and the other three
on the front of the roof, with a determinate and ample separation from
the little insulated chair of the guard. This relaxation was conceded
by way of compensating to Scotland her disadvantages in point of
population. England, by the superior density of her population, might
always count upon a large fund of profits in the fractional trips of
chance passengers riding for short distances of two or three stages. In
Scotland this chance counted for much less. And therefore, to make good
the deficiency, Scotland was allowed a compensatory profit upon one
_extra_ passenger.] in the rear of the roof, from which he could
exchange his own yarns with those of the guard. No greater offence was
then known to mail-coaches; it was treason, it was _læsa majestas_, it
was by tendency arson; and the ashes of Jack's pipe, falling amongst the
straw of the hinder boot, containing the mail-bags, raised a flame
which (aided by the wind of our motion) threatened a revolution in
the republic of letters. Yet even this left the sanctity of the box
unviolated. In dignified repose, the coachman and myself sat on, resting
with benign composure upon our knowledge that the fire would have
to burn its way through four inside passengers before it could reach
ourselves. I remarked to the coachman, with a quotation from Virgil's
"Æneid" really too hackneyed--

  "Jam proximus ardet
  Ucalegon."

But, recollecting that the Virgilian part of the coachman's education
might have been neglected, I interpreted so far as to say that perhaps
at that moment the flames were catching hold of our worthy brother and
inside passenger, Ucalegon. The coachman made no answer,--which is my
own way when a stranger addresses me either in Syriac or in Coptic;
but by his faint sceptical smile he seemed to insinuate that he knew
better,--for that Ucalegon, as it happened, was not in the way-bill, and
therefore could not have been booked.

No dignity is perfect which does not at some point ally itself with the
mysterious. The connexion of the mail with the state and the executive
government--a connexion obvious, but yet not strictly defined--gave to
the whole mail establishment an official grandeur which did us service
on the roads, and invested us with seasonable terrors. Not the
less impressive were those terrors because their legal limits were
imperfectly ascertained. Look at those turnpike gates: with what
deferential hurry, with what an obedient start, they fly open at our
approach! Look at that long line of carts and carters ahead, audaciously
usurping the very crest of the road. Ah! traitors, they do not hear us
as yet; but, as soon as the dreadful blast of our horn reaches them with
proclamation of our approach, see with what frenzy of trepidation they
fly to their horses' heads, and deprecate our wrath by the precipitation
of their crane-neck quarterings. Treason they feel to be their crime;
each individual carter feels himself under the ban of confiscation and
attainder; his blood is attainted through six generations; and nothing
is wanting but the headsman and his axe, the block and the sawdust, to
close up the vista of his horrors. What! shall it be within benefit of
clergy to delay the king's message on the high road?--to interrupt the
great respirations, ebb and flood, _systole_ and _diastole_, of the
national intercourse?--to endanger the safety of tidings running day and
night between all nations and languages? Or can it be fancied, amongst
the weakest of men, that the bodies of the criminals will be given up to
their widows for Christian burial? Now, the doubts which were raised
as to our powers did more to wrap them in terror, by wrapping them in
uncertainty, than could have been effected by the sharpest definitions
of the law from the Quarter Sessions. We, on our parts (we, the
collective mail, I mean), did our utmost to exalt the idea of our
privileges by the insolence with which we wielded them. Whether this
insolence rested upon law that gave it a sanction, or upon conscious
power that haughtily dispensed with that sanction, equally it spoke from
a potential station; and the agent, in each particular insolence of the
moment, was viewed reverentially, as one having authority.

Sometimes after breakfast his Majesty's mail would become frisky; and,
in its difficult wheelings amongst the intricacies of early markets,
it would upset an apple-cart, a cart loaded with eggs, &c. Huge was
the affliction and dismay, awful was the smash. I, as far as possible,
endeavoured in such a case to represent the conscience and moral
sensibilities of the mail; and, when wildernesses of eggs were lying
poached under our horses' hoofs, then would I stretch forth my hands
in sorrow, saying (in words too celebrated at that time, from the false
echoes [Footnote: "_False echoes_":--Yes, false! for the words ascribed
to Napoleon, as breathed to the memory of Desaix, never were uttered at
all. They stand in the same category of theatrical fictions as the cry
of the foundering line-of-battle ship _Vengeur_, as the vaunt of General
Cambronne at Waterloo, "La Garde meurt, mais ne se rend pas," or as the
repartees of Talleyrand.] of Marengo), "Ah! wherefore have we not time
to weep over you?"--which was evidently impossible, since, in fact, we
had not time to laugh over them. Tied to post-office allowance in some
cases of fifty minutes for eleven miles, could the royal mail pretend to
undertake the offices of sympathy and condolence? Could it be expected
to provide tears for the accidents of the road? If even it seemed to
trample on humanity, it did so, I felt, in discharge of its own more
peremptory duties.

Upholding the morality of the mail, _a fortiori_ I upheld its rights; as
a matter of duty, I stretched to the uttermost its privilege of imperial
precedency, and astonished weak minds by the feudal powers which I
hinted to be lurking constructively in the charters of this proud
establishment. Once I remember being on the box of the Holyhead mail,
between Shrewsbury and Oswestry, when a tawdry thing from Birmingham,
some "Tallyho" or "Highflyer," all flaunting with green and gold, came
up alongside of us. What a contrast to our royal simplicity of form and
colour in this plebeian wretch! The single ornament on our dark ground
of chocolate colour was the mighty shield of the imperial arms, but
emblazoned in proportions as modest as a signet-ring bears to a seal
of office. Even this was displayed only on a single panel, whispering,
rather than proclaiming, our relations to the mighty state; whilst the
beast from Birmingham, our green-and-gold friend from false, fleeting,
perjured Brummagem, had as much writing and painting on its sprawling
flanks as would have puzzled a decipherer from the tombs of Luxor. For
some time this Birmingham machine ran along by our side--a piece
of familiarity that already of itself seemed to me sufficiently
Jacobinical. But all at once a movement of the horses announced a
desperate intention of leaving us behind. "Do you see _that?_" I said to
the coachman.--"I see," was his short answer. He was wide awake,--yet
he waited longer than seemed prudent; for the horses of our audacious
opponent had a disagreeable air of freshness and power. But his motive
was loyal; his wish was that the Birmingham conceit should be full-blown
before he froze it. When _that_ seemed right, he unloosed, or, to speak
by a stronger word, he _sprang_, his known resources: he slipped our
royal horses like cheetahs, or hunting-leopards, after the affrighted
game. How they could retain such a reserve of fiery power after the work
they had accomplished seemed hard to explain. But on our side, besides
the physical superiority, was a tower of moral strength, namely the
king's name, "which they upon the adverse faction wanted." Passing them
without an effort, as it seemed, we threw them into the rear with so
lengthening an interval between us as proved in itself the bitterest
mockery of their presumption; whilst our guard blew back a shattering
blast of triumph that was really too painfully full of derision.

I mention this little incident for its connexion with what followed. A
Welsh rustic, sitting behind me, asked if I had not felt my heart burn
within me during the progress of the race? I said, with philosophic
calmness, _No_; because we were not racing with a mail, so that no glory
could be gained. In fact, it was sufficiently mortifying that such a
Birmingham thing should dare to challenge us. The Welshman replied
that he didn't see _that_; for that a cat might look at a king, and a
Brummagem coach might lawfully race the Holyhead mail. "_Race_ us, if
you like," I replied, "though even _that_ has an air of sedition; but
not _beat_ us. This would have been treason; and for its own sake I
am glad that the 'Tallyho' was disappointed." So dissatisfied did the
Welshman seem with this opinion that at last I was obliged to tell him
a very fine story from one of our elder dramatists: viz., that once,
in some far Oriental kingdom, when the sultan of all the land, with his
princes, ladies, and chief omrahs, were flying their falcons, a hawk
suddenly flew at a majestic eagle, and, in defiance of the eagle's
natural advantages, in contempt also of the eagle's traditional royalty,
and before the whole assembled field of astonished spectators from Agra
and Lahore, killed the eagle on the spot. Amazement seized the sultan at
the unequal contest, and burning admiration for its unparalleled result.
He commanded that the hawk should be brought before him; he caressed the
bird with enthusiasm; and he ordered that, for the commemoration of his
matchless courage, a diadem of gold and rubies should be solemnly
placed on the hawk's head, but then that, immediately after this solemn
coronation, the bird should be led off to execution, as the most valiant
indeed of traitors, but not the less a traitor, as having dared to rise
rebelliously against his liege lord and anointed sovereign, the eagle.
"Now," said I to the Welshman, "to you and me, as men of refined
sensibilities, how painful it would have been that this poor Brummagem
brute, the 'Tallyho,' in the impossible case of a victory over us,
should have been crowned with Birmingham tinsel, with paste diamonds
and Roman pearls, and then led off to instant execution." The Welshman
doubted if that could be warranted by law. And, when I hinted at the
6th of Edward Longshanks, chap. 18, for regulating the precedency
of coaches, as being probably the statute relied on for the capital
punishment of such offences, he replied drily that, if the attempt to
pass a mail really were treasonable, it was a pity that the "Tallyho"
appeared to have so imperfect an acquaintance with law.

The modern modes of travelling cannot compare with the old mail-coach
system in grandeur and power. They boast of more velocity,--not,
however, as a consciousness, but as a fact of our lifeless knowledge,
resting upon _alien_ evidence: as, for instance, because somebody
_says_ that we have gone fifty miles in the hour, though we are far from
feeling it as a personal experience; or upon the evidence of a result,
as that actually we find ourselves in York four hours after leaving
London. Apart from such an assertion, or such a result, I myself am
little aware of the pace. But, seated on the old mail-coach, we needed
no evidence out of ourselves to indicate the velocity. On this system
the word was not _magna loquimur_, as upon railways, but _vivimus_. Yes,
"magna _vivimus_"; we do not make verbal ostentation of our grandeurs,
we realise our grandeurs in act, and in the very experience of life. The
vital experience of the glad animal sensibilities made doubts impossible
on the question of our speed; we heard our speed, we saw it, we felt it
as a thrilling; and this speed was not the product of blind insensate
agencies, that had no sympathy to give, but was incarnated in the
fiery eyeballs of the noblest amongst brutes, in his dilated nostril,
spasmodic muscles, and thunder-beating hoofs. The sensibility of the
horse, uttering itself in the maniac light of his eye, might be the last
vibration of such a movement; the glory of Salamanca might be the
first. But the intervening links that connected them, that spread the
earthquake of battle into the eyeballs of the horse, were the heart of
man and its electric thrillings--kindling in the rapture of the fiery
strife, and then propagating its own tumults by contagious shouts and
gestures to the heart of his servant the horse. But now, on the new
system of travelling, iron tubes and boilers have disconnected man's
heart from the ministers of his locomotion. Nile nor Trafalgar has power
to raise an extra bubble in a steam-kettle. The galvanic cycle is
broken up for ever; man's imperial nature no longer sends itself forward
through the electric sensibility of the horse; the inter-agencies are
gone in the mode of communication between the horse and his master out
of which grew so many aspects of sublimity under accidents of mists that
hid, or sudden blazes that revealed, of mobs that agitated, or midnight
solitudes that awed. Tidings fitted to convulse all nations must
henceforwards travel by culinary process; and the trumpet that once
announced from afar the laurelled mail, heart-shaking when heard
screaming on the wind and proclaiming itself through the darkness to
every village or solitary house on its route, has now given way for
ever to the pot-wallopings of the boiler. Thus have perished multiform
openings for public expressions of interest, scenical yet natural, in
great national tidings,--for revelations of faces and groups that could
not offer themselves amongst the fluctuating mobs of a railway station.
The gatherings of gazers about a laurelled mail had one centre, and
acknowledged one sole interest. But the crowds attending at a railway
station have as little unity as running water, and own as many centres
as there are separate carriages in the train.

How else, for example, than as a constant watcher for the dawn, and for
the London mail that in summer months entered about daybreak amongst the
lawny thickets of Maryborough forest, couldst thou, sweet Fanny of the
Bath road, have become the glorified inmate of my dreams? Yet Fanny, as
the loveliest young woman for face and person that perhaps in my whole
life I have beheld, merited the station which even now, from a distance
of forty years, she holds in my dreams; yes, though by links of natural
association she brings along with her a troop of dreadful creatures,
fabulous and not fabulous, that are more abominable to the heart than
Fanny and the dawn are delightful.

Miss Fanny of the Bath road, strictly speaking, lived at a mile's
distance from that road, but came so continually to meet the mail that
I on my frequent transits rarely missed her, and naturally connected her
image with the great thoroughfare where only I had ever seen her. Why
she came so punctually I do not exactly know; but I believe with some
burden of commissions, to be executed in Bath, which had gathered to
her own residence as a central rendezvous for converging them. The
mail-coachman who drove the Bath mail and wore the royal livery
[Footnote: "Wore the royal livery":--The general impression was that
the royal livery belonged of right to the mail-coachmen as their
professional dress. But that was an error. To the guard it _did_ belong,
I believe, and was obviously essential as an official warrant, and as a
means of instant identification for his person, in the discharge of his
important public duties. But the coachman, and especially if his place
in the series did not connect him immediately with London and the
General Post-Office, obtained the scarlet coat only as an honorary
distinction after long (or, if not long, trying and special) service.]
happened to be Fanny's grandfather. A good man he was, that loved his
beautiful granddaughter, and, loving her wisely, was vigilant over her
deportment in any case where young Oxford might happen to be concerned.
Did my vanity then suggest that I myself, individually, could fall
within the line of his terrors? Certainly not, as regarded any physical
pretensions that I could plead; for Fanny (as a chance passenger from
her own neighbourhood once told me) counted in her train a hundred and
ninety-nine professed admirers, if not open aspirants to her favour; and
probably not one of the whole brigade but excelled myself in personal
advantages. Ulysses even, with the unfair advantage of his accursed bow,
could hardly have undertaken that amount of suitors. So the danger might
have seemed slight--only that woman is universally aristocratic; it is
amongst her nobilities of heart that she _is_ so. Now, the aristocratic
distinctions in my favour might easily with Miss Fanny have compensated
my physical deficiencies. Did I then make love to Fanny? Why, yes; about
as much love as one _could_ make whilst the mail was changing horses--a
process which, ten years later, did not occupy above eighty seconds; but
_then_,--viz., about Waterloo--it occupied five times eighty. Now, four
hundred seconds offer a field quite ample enough for whispering into
a young woman's ear a great deal of truth, and (by way of parenthesis)
some trifle of falsehood. Grandpapa did right, therefore, to watch me.
And yet, as happens too often to the grandpapas of earth in a contest
with the admirers of granddaughters, how vainly would he have watched me
had I meditated any evil whispers to Fanny! She, it is my belief, would
have protected herself against any man's evil suggestions. But he, as
the result showed, could not have intercepted the opportunities for
such suggestions. Yet, why not? Was he not active? Was he not blooming?
Blooming he was as Fanny herself.

"Say, all our praises why should lords----"

Stop, that's not the line.

"Say, all our roses why should girls engross?"

The coachman showed rosy blossoms on his face deeper even than his
granddaughter's--_his_ being drawn from the ale-cask, Fanny's from
the fountains of the dawn. But, in spite of his blooming face, some
infirmities he had; and one particularly in which he too much resembled
a crocodile. This lay in a monstrous inaptitude for turning round. The
crocodile, I presume, owes that inaptitude to the absurd _length_ of his
back; but in our grandpapa it arose rather from the absurd _breadth_ of
his back, combined, possibly, with some growing stiffness in his legs.
Now, upon this crocodile infirmity of his I planted a human advantage
for tendering my homage to Miss Fanny. In defiance of all his honourable
vigilance, no sooner had he presented to us his mighty Jovian back (what
a field for displaying to mankind his royal scarlet!), whilst inspecting
professionally the buckles, the straps, and the silvery turrets
[Footnote: "_Turrets_":--As one who loves and venerates Chaucer for his
unrivalled merits of tenderness, of picturesque characterisation, and of
narrative skill, I noticed with great pleasure that the word _torrettes_
is used by him to designate the little devices through which the reins
are made to pass. This same word, in the same exact sense, I heard
uniformly used by many scores of illustrious mail-coachmen to whose
confidential friendship I had the honour of being admitted in my younger
days.] of his harness, than I raised Miss Fanny's hand to my lips, and,
by the mixed tenderness and respectfulness of my manner, caused her
easily to understand how happy it would make me to rank upon her list
as No. 10 or 12: in which case a few casualties amongst her lovers (and,
observe, they _hanged_ liberally in those days) might have promoted me
speedily to the top of the tree; as, on the other hand, with how
much loyalty of submission I acquiesced by anticipation in her award,
supposing that she should plant me in the very rearward of her favour,
as No. 199 + 1. Most truly I loved this beautiful and ingenuous girl;
and, had it not been for the Bath mail, timing all courtships by
post-office allowance, heaven only knows what might have come of it.
People talk of being over head and ears in love; now, the mail was the
cause that I sank only over ears in love,--which, you know, still left a
trifle of brain to overlook the whole conduct of the affair.

Ah, reader! when I look back upon those days, it seems to me that all
things change--all things perish. "Perish the roses and the palms of
kings": perish even the crowns and trophies of Waterloo: thunder and
lightning are not the thunder and lightning which I remember. Roses
are degenerating. The Fannies of our island--though this I say with
reluctance--are not visibly improving; and the Bath road is notoriously
superannuated. Crocodiles, you will say, are stationary. Mr. Waterton
tells me that the crocodile does _not change_,--that a cayman, in fact,
or an alligator, is just as good for riding upon as he was in the time
of the Pharaohs. _That_ may be; but the reason is that the crocodile
does not live fast--he is a slow coach. I believe it is generally
understood among naturalists that the crocodile is a blockhead. It is
my own impression that the Pharaohs were also blockheads. Now, as
the Pharaohs and the crocodile domineered over Egyptian society, this
accounts for a singular mistake that prevailed through innumerable
generations on the Nile. The crocodile made the ridiculous blunder of
supposing man to be meant chiefly for his own eating. Man, taking a
different view of the subject, naturally met that mistake by another: he
viewed the crocodile as a thing sometimes to worship, but always to
run away from. And this continued till Mr. Waterton [Footnote: "_Mr.
Waterton_":--Had the reader lived through the last generation, he would
not need to be told that, some thirty or thirty-five years back,
Mr. Waterton, a distinguished country gentleman of ancient family in
Northumberland, publicly mounted and rode in top-boots a savage old
crocodile, that was restive and very impertinent, but all to no purpose.
The crocodile jibbed and tried to kick, but vainly. He was no more able
to throw the squire than Sinbad was to throw the old scoundrel who used
his back without paying for it, until he discovered a mode (slightly
immoral, perhaps, though some think not) of murdering the old fraudulent
jockey, and so circuitously of unhorsing him.] changed the relations
between the animals. The mode of escaping from the reptile he showed to
be not by running away, but by leaping on its back booted and spurred.
The two animals had misunderstood each other. The use of the crocodile
has now been cleared up--viz., to be ridden; and the final cause of
man is that he may improve the health of the crocodile by riding him
a-fox-hunting before breakfast. And it is pretty certain that any
crocodile who has been regularly hunted through the season, and is
master of the weight he carries, will take a six-barred gate now as well
as ever he would have done in the infancy of the pyramids.

If, therefore, the crocodile does _not_ change, all things else
undeniably _do_: even the shadow of the pyramids grows less. And often
the restoration in vision of Fanny and the Bath road makes me too
pathetically sensible of that truth. Out of the darkness, if I happen
to call back the image of Fanny, up rises suddenly from a gulf of forty
years a rose in June; or, if I think for an instant of the rose in
June, up rises the heavenly face of Fanny. One after the other, like the
antiphonies in the choral service, rise Fanny and the rose in June, then
back again the rose in June and Fanny. Then come both together, as in
a chorus--roses and Fannies, Fannies and roses, without end, thick
as blossoms in paradise. Then comes a venerable crocodile, in a royal
livery of scarlet and gold, with sixteen capes; and the crocodile is
driving four-in-hand from the box of the Bath mail. And suddenly we upon
the mail are pulled up by a mighty dial, sculptured with the hours, that
mingle with the heavens and the heavenly host. Then all at once we are
arrived at Marlborough forest, amongst the lovely households [Footnote:
"_Households_":--Roe-deer do not congregate in herds like the fallow
or the red deer, but by separate families, parents and children; which
feature of approximation to the sanctity of human hearths, added to
their comparatively miniature and graceful proportions, conciliates
to them an interest of peculiar tenderness, supposing even that this
beautiful creature is less characteristically impressed with the
grandeurs of savage and forest life.] of the roe-deer; the deer and
their fawns retire into the dewy thickets; the thickets are rich with
roses; once again the roses call up the sweet countenance of Fanny; and
she, being the granddaughter of a crocodile, awakens a dreadful host of
semi-legendary animals--griffins, dragons, basilisks, sphinxes--till
at length the whole vision of fighting images crowds into one towering
armorial shield, a vast emblazonry of human charities and human
loveliness that have perished, but quartered heraldically with
unutterable and demoniac natures, whilst over all rises, as a
surmounting crest, one fair female hand, with the forefinger pointing,
in sweet, sorrowful admonition, upwards to heaven, where is sculptured
the eternal writing which proclaims the frailty of earth and her
children.

But the grandest chapter of our experience within the whole mail-coach
service was on those occasions when we went down from London with the
news of victory. A period of about ten years stretched from Trafalgar
to Waterloo; the second and third years of which period (1806 and
1807) were comparatively sterile; but the other nine (from 1805 to 1815
inclusively) furnished a long succession of victories, the least of
which, in such a contest of Titans, had an inappreciable value of
position: partly for its absolute interference with the plans of our
enemy, but still more from its keeping alive through central Europe the
sense of a deep-seated vulnerability in France. Even to tease the coasts
of our enemy, to mortify them by continual blockades, to insult them
by capturing if it were but a baubling schooner under the eyes of their
arrogant armies, repeated from time to time a sullen proclamation of
power lodged in one quarter to which the hopes of Christendom turned in
secret. How much more loudly must this proclamation have spoken in the
audacity [Footnote: "_Audacity_":--Such the French accounted it; and it
has struck me that Soult would not have been so popular in London, at
the period of her present Majesty's coronation, or in Manchester,
on occasion of his visit to that town, if they had been aware of the
insolence with which he spoke of us in notes written at intervals from
the field of Waterloo. As though it had been mere felony in our army
to look a French one in the face, he said in more notes than one,
dated from two to four P.M. on the field of Waterloo, "Here are the
English--we have them; they are caught _en flagrant délit_" Yet no man
should have known us better; no man had drunk deeper from the cup of
humiliation than Soult had in 1809, when ejected by us with headlong
violence from Oporto, and pursued through a long line of wrecks to the
frontier of Spain; and subsequently at Albuera, in the bloodiest of
recorded battles, to say nothing of Toulouse, he should have learned our
pretensions.] of having bearded the _élite_ of their troops, and having
beaten them in pitched battles! Five years of life it was worth paying
down for the privilege of an outside place on a mail-coach, when
carrying down the first tidings of any such event. And it is to be noted
that, from our insular situation, and the multitude of our frigates
disposable for the rapid transmission of intelligence, rarely did any
unauthorised rumour steal away a prelibation from the first aroma of the
regular despatches. The government news was generally the earliest news.

From eight P.M. to fifteen or twenty minutes later imagine the mails
assembled on parade in Lombard Street; where, at that time, [Footnote:
"_At that time_":--I speak of the era previous to Waterloo.] and not in
St. Martin's-le-Grand, was seated the General Post-Office. In what exact
strength we mustered I do not remember; but, from the length of each
separate _attelage_, we filled the street, though a long one, and
though we were drawn up in double file. On _any_ night the spectacle
was beautiful. The absolute perfection of all the appointments about the
carriages and the harness, their strength, their brilliant cleanliness,
their beautiful simplicity--but, more than all, the royal magnificence
of the horses--were what might first have fixed the attention. Every
carriage on every morning in the year was taken down to an official
inspector for examination: wheels, axles, linchpins, pole, glasses,
lamps, were all critically probed and tested. Every part of every
carriage had been cleaned, every horse had been groomed, with as much
rigour as if they belonged to a private gentleman; and that part of the
spectacle offered itself always. But the night before us is a night
of victory; and, behold! to the ordinary display what a heart-shaking
addition!--horses, men, carriages, all are dressed in laurels and
flowers, oak-leaves and ribbons. The guards, as being officially his
Majesty's servants, and of the coachmen such as are within the privilege
of the post-office, wear the royal liveries of course; and, as it is
summer (for all the _land_ victories were naturally won in summer), they
wear, on this fine evening, these liveries exposed to view, without any
covering of upper coats. Such a costume, and the elaborate arrangement
of the laurels in their hats, dilate their hearts, by giving to them
openly a personal connexion with the great news in which already they
have the general interest of patriotism. That great national sentiment
surmounts and quells all sense of ordinary distinctions. Those
passengers who happen to be gentlemen are now hardly to be distinguished
as such except by dress; for the usual reserve of their manner in
speaking to the attendants has on this night melted away. One heart,
one pride, one glory, connects every man by the transcendent bond of
his national blood. The spectators, who are numerous beyond precedent,
express their sympathy with these fervent feelings by continual hurrahs.
Every moment are shouted aloud by the post-office servants, and summoned
to draw up, the great ancestral names of cities known to history through
a thousand years--Lincoln, Winchester, Portsmouth, Gloucester, Oxford,
Bristol, Manchester, York, Newcastle, Edinburgh, Glasgow, Perth,
Stirling, Aberdeen--expressing the grandeur of the empire by the
antiquity of its towns, and the grandeur of the mail establishment by
the diffusive radiation of its separate missions. Every moment you hear
the thunder of lids locked down upon the mail-bags. That sound to each
individual mail is the signal for drawing off; which process is the
finest part of the entire spectacle. Then come the horses into play.
Horses! can these be horses that bound off with the action and gestures
of leopards? What stir!--what sea-like ferment!--what a thundering of
wheels!--what a trampling of hoofs!--what a sounding of trumpets!--what
farewell cheers--what redoubling peals of brotherly congratulation,
connecting the name of the particular mail--"Liverpool for ever!"--with
the name of the particular victory--"Badajoz for ever!" or "Salamanca
for ever!" The half-slumbering consciousness that all night long, and
all the next day--perhaps for even a longer period--many of these mails,
like fire racing along a train of gunpowder, will be kindling at
every instant new successions of burning joy, has an obscure effect of
multiplying the victory itself, by multiplying to the imagination into
infinity the stages of its progressive diffusion. A fiery arrow seems
to be let loose, which from that moment is destined to travel,
without intermission, westwards for three hundred [Footnote: "_Three
hundred_":--Of necessity, this scale of measurement, to an American, if
he happens to be a thoughtless man, must sound ludicrous. Accordingly,
I remember a case in which an American writer indulges himself in the
luxury of a little fibbing, by ascribing to an Englishman a pompous
account of the Thames, constructed entirely upon American ideas of
grandeur, and concluding in something like these terms:--"And, sir,
arriving at London, this mighty father of rivers attains a breadth of
at least two furlongs, having, in its winding course, traversed the
astonishing distance of one hundred and seventy miles." And this
the candid American thinks it fair to contrast with the scale of the
Mississippi. Now, it is hardly worth while to answer a pure fiction
gravely; else one might say that no Englishman out of Bedlam ever
thought of looking in an island for the rivers of a continent, nor,
consequently, could have thought of looking for the peculiar grandeur of
the Thames in the length of its course, or in the extent of soil which
it drains. Yet, if he _had_ been so absurd, the American might have
recollected that a river, not to be compared with the Thames even as to
volume of water--viz., the Tiber--has contrived to make itself heard of
in this world for twenty-five centuries to an extent not reached as
yet by any river, however corpulent, of his own land. The glory of
the Thames is measured by the destiny of the population to which it
ministers, by the commerce which it supports, by the grandeur of the
empire in which, though far from the largest, it is the most influential
stream. Upon some such scale, and not by a transfer of Columbian
standards, is the course of our English mails to be valued. The American
may fancy the effect of his own valuations to our English ears by
supposing the case of a Siberian glorifying his country in these
terms:--"These wretches, sir, in France and England, cannot march half a
mile in any direction without finding a house where food can be had and
lodging; whereas such is the noble desolation of our magnificent country
that in many a direction for a thousand miles I will engage that a dog
shall not find shelter from a snow-storm, nor a wren find an apology for
breakfast."] miles--northwards for six hundred; and the sympathy of our
Lombard Street friends at parting is exalted a hundredfold by a sort of
visionary sympathy with the yet slumbering sympathies which in so vast a
succession we are going to awake.

Liberated from the embarrassments of the city, and issuing into the
broad uncrowded avenues of the northern suburbs, we soon begin to enter
upon our natural pace of ten miles an hour. In the broad light of the
summer evening, the sun, perhaps, only just at the point of setting, we
are seen from every storey of every house. Heads of every age crowd to
the windows; young and old understand the language of our victorious
symbols; and rolling volleys of sympathising cheers run along us, behind
us, and before us. The beggar, rearing himself against the wall, forgets
his lameness--real or assumed--thinks not of his whining trade, but
stands erect, with bold exulting smiles, as we pass him. The victory has
healed him, and says, Be thou whole! Women and children, from garrets
alike and cellars, through infinite London, look down or look up with
loving eyes upon our gay ribbons and our martial laurels; sometimes
kiss their hands; sometimes hang out, as signals of affection,
pocket-handkerchiefs, aprons, dusters, anything that, by catching the
summer breezes, will express an aerial jubilation. On the London side of
Barnet, to which we draw near within a few minutes after nine, observe
that private carriage which is approaching us. The weather being so
warm, the glasses are all down; and one may read, as on the stage of a
theatre, everything that goes on within. It contains three ladies--one
likely to be "mamma," and two of seventeen or eighteen, who are probably
her daughters. What lovely animation, what beautiful unpremeditated
pantomime, explaining to us every syllable that passes, in these
ingenuous girls! By the sudden start and raising of the hands on first
discovering our laurelled equipage, by the sudden movement and appeal to
the elder lady from both of them, and by the heightened colour on their
animated countenances, we can almost hear them saying, "See, see! Look
at their laurels! Oh, mamma! there has been a great battle in Spain; and
it has been a great victory." In a moment we are on the point of passing
them. We passengers--I on the box, and the two on the roof behind
me--raise our hats to the ladies; the coachman makes his professional
salute with the whip; the guard even, though punctilious on the matter
of his dignity as an officer under the crown, touches his hat. The
ladies move to us, in return, with a winning graciousness of gesture;
all smile on each side in a way that nobody could misunderstand, and
that nothing short of a grand national sympathy could so instantaneously
prompt. Will these ladies say that we are nothing to _them_? Oh no; they
will not say _that_. They cannot deny--they do not deny--that for this
night they are our sisters; gentle or simple, scholar or illiterate
servant, for twelve hours to come, we on the outside have the honour
to be their brothers. Those poor women, again, who stop to gaze upon
us with delight at the entrance of Barnet, and seem, by their air of
weariness, to be returning from labour--do you mean to say that they are
washerwomen and charwomen? Oh, my poor friend, you are quite mistaken. I
assure you they stand in a far higher rank; for this one night they feel
themselves by birthright to be daughters of England, and answer to no
humbler title.

Every joy, however, even rapturous joy--such is the sad law of
earth--may carry with it grief, or fear of grief, to some. Three miles
beyond Barnet, we see approaching us another private carriage, nearly
repeating the circumstances of the former case. Here, also, the glasses
are all down; here, also, is an elderly lady seated; but the two
daughters are missing; for the single young person sitting by the lady's
side seems to be an attendant--so I judge from her dress, and her air
of respectful reserve. The lady is in mourning; and her countenance
expresses sorrow. At first she does not look up; so that I believe she
is not aware of our approach, until she hears the measured beating of
our horses' hoofs. Then she raises her eyes to settle them painfully on
our triumphal equipage. Our decorations explain the case to her at once;
but she beholds them with apparent anxiety, or even with terror. Some
time before this, I, finding it difficult to hit a flying mark when
embarrassed by the coachman's person and reins intervening, had given
to the guard a "Courier" evening paper, containing the gazette, for the
next carriage that might pass. Accordingly he tossed it in, so folded
that the huge capitals expressing some such legend as GLORIOUS VICTORY
might catch the eye at once. To see the paper, however, at all,
interpreted as it was by our ensigns of triumph, explained everything;
and, if the guard were right in thinking the lady to have received it
with a gesture of horror, it could not be doubtful that she had suffered
some deep personal affliction in connexion with this Spanish war.

Here, now, was the case of one who, having formerly suffered, might,
erroneously perhaps, be distressing herself with anticipations of
another similar suffering. That same night, and hardly three hours
later, occurred the reverse case. A poor woman, who too probably
would find herself, in a day or two, to have suffered the heaviest
of afflictions by the battle, blindly allowed herself to express an
exultation so unmeasured in the news and its details as gave to her the
appearance which amongst Celtic Highlanders is called _fey_. This was at
some little town where we changed horses an hour or two after midnight.
Some fair or wake had kept the people up out of their beds, and had
occasioned a partial illumination of the stalls and booths, presenting
an unusual but very impressive effect. We saw many lights moving about
as we drew near; and perhaps the most striking scene on the whole
route was our reception at this place. The flashing of torches and the
beautiful radiance of blue lights (technically, Bengal lights) upon
the heads of our horses; the fine effect of such a showery and ghostly
illumination falling upon our flowers and glittering laurels [Footnote:
"_Glittering laurels_":--I must observe that the colour of _green_
suffers almost a spiritual change and exaltation under the effect of
Bengal lights.]; whilst all around ourselves, that formed a centre of
light, the darkness gathered on the rear and flanks in massy blackness:
these optical splendours, together with the prodigious enthusiasm of the
people, composed a picture at once scenical and affecting, theatrical
and holy. As we staid for three or four minutes, I alighted; and
immediately from a dismantled stall in the street, where no doubt she
had been presiding through the earlier part of the night, advanced
eagerly a middle-aged woman. The sight of my newspaper it was that had
drawn her attention upon myself. The victory which we were carrying
down to the provinces on _this_ occasion was the imperfect one of
Talavera--imperfect for its results, such was the virtual treachery of
the Spanish general, Cuesta, but not imperfect in its ever-memorable
heroism. I told her the main outline of the battle. The agitation of
her enthusiasm had been so conspicuous when listening, and when first
applying for information, that I could not but ask her if she had not
some relative in the Peninsular army. Oh yes; her only son was there.
In what regiment? He was a trooper in the 23d Dragoons. My heart sank
within me as she made that answer. This sublime regiment, which an
Englishman should never mention without raising his hat to their memory,
had made the most memorable and effective charge recorded in military
annals. They leaped their horses--_over_ a trench where they could;
_into_ it, and with the result of death or mutilation, when they could
_not_. What proportion cleared the trench is nowhere stated. Those
who _did_ closed up and went down upon the enemy with such divinity of
fervour (I use the word _divinity_ by design: the inspiration of God
must have prompted this movement for those whom even then He was calling
to His presence) that two results followed. As regarded the enemy, this
23d Dragoons, not, I believe, originally three hundred and fifty strong,
paralysed a French column six thousand strong, then ascended the hill,
and fixed the gaze of the whole French army. As regarded themselves,
the 23d were supposed at first to have been barely not annihilated; but
eventually, I believe, about one in four survived. And this, then, was
the regiment--a regiment already for some hours glorified and hallowed
to the ear of all London, as lying stretched, by a large majority, upon
one bloody aceldama--in which the young trooper served whose mother was
now talking in a spirit of such joyous enthusiasm. Did I tell her the
truth? Had I the heart to break up her dreams? No. To-morrow, said I
to myself--to-morrow, or the next day, will publish the worst. For one
night more wherefore should she not sleep in peace? After to-morrow
the chances are too many that peace will forsake her pillow. This brief
respite, then, let her owe to _my_ gift and _my_ forbearance. But, if I
told her not of the bloody price that had been paid, not therefore was
I silent on the contributions from her son's regiment to that day's
service and glory. I showed her not the funeral banners under which the
noble regiment was sleeping. I lifted not the overshadowing laurels from
the bloody trench in which horse and rider lay mangled together. But I
told her how these dear children of England, officers and privates,
had leaped their horses over all obstacles as gaily as hunters to the
morning's chase. I told her how they rode their horses into the midst of
death,--saying to myself, but not saying to _her_ "and laid down their
young lives for thee, O mother England! as willingly--poured out their
noble blood as cheerfully--as ever, after a long day's sport, when
infants, they had rested their weary heads upon their mother's knees, or
had sunk to sleep in her arms." Strange it is, yet true, that she seemed
to have no fears for her son's safety, even after this knowledge
that the 23d Dragoons had been memorably engaged; but so much was she
enraptured by the knowledge that _his_ regiment, and therefore that
_he_, had rendered conspicuous service in the dreadful conflict--a
service which had actually made them, within the last twelve hours,
the foremost topic of conversation in London--so absolutely was fear
swallowed up in joy--that, in the mere simplicity of her fervent nature,
the poor woman threw her arms round my neck, as she thought of her son,
and gave to _me_ the kiss which secretly was meant for _him_.

What is to be taken as the predominant opinion of man, reflective and
philosophic, upon SUDDEN DEATH? It is remarkable that, in different
conditions of society, sudden death has been variously regarded as the
consummation of an earthly career most fervently to be desired, or,
again, as that consummation which is with most horror to be deprecated.
Cæsar the Dictator, at his last dinner-party (_coena_), on the very
evening before his assassination, when the minutes of his earthly career
were numbered, being asked what death, in _his_ judgment, might be
pronounced the most eligible, replied "That which should be most
sudden." On the other hand, the divine Litany of our English Church,
when breathing forth supplications, as if in some representative
character, for the whole human race prostrate before God, places such
a death in the very van of horrors: "From lightning and tempest; from
plague, pestilence, and famine; from battle and murder, and from SUDDEN
DEATH--_Good Lord, deliver us_." Sudden death is here made to crown the
climax in a grand ascent of calamities; it is ranked among the last of
curses; and yet by the noblest of Romans it was ranked as the first of
blessings. In that difference most readers will see little more than
the essential difference between Christianity and Paganism. But this,
on consideration, I doubt. The Christian Church may be right in its
estimate of sudden death; and it is a natural feeling, though after all
it may also be an infirm one, to wish for a quiet dismissal from
life, as that which _seems_ most reconcilable with meditation, with
penitential retrospects, and with the humilities of farewell prayer.
There does not, however, occur to me any direct scriptural warrant for
this earnest petition of the English Litany, unless under a special
construction of the word "sudden." It seems a petition indulged rather
and conceded to human infirmity than exacted from human piety. It is not
so much a doctrine built upon the eternities of the Christian system
as a plausible opinion built upon special varieties of physical
temperament. Let that, however, be as it may, two remarks suggest
themselves as prudent restraints upon a doctrine which else _may_
wander, and _has_ wandered, into an uncharitable superstition. The
first is this: that many people are likely to exaggerate the horror of
a sudden death from the disposition to lay a false stress upon words
or acts simply because by an accident they have become _final_ words or
acts. If a man dies, for instance, by some sudden death when he happens
to be intoxicated, such a death is falsely regarded with peculiar
horror; as though the intoxication were suddenly exalted into a
blasphemy. But _that_ is unphilosophic. The man was, or he was not,
_habitually_ a drunkard. If not, if his intoxication were a solitary
accident, there can be no reason for allowing special emphasis to this
act simply because through misfortune it became his final act. Nor,
on the other hand, if it were no accident, but one of his _habitual_
transgressions, will it be the more habitual or the more a transgression
because some sudden calamity, surprising him, has caused this habitual
transgression to be also a final one. Could the man have had any reason
even dimly to foresee his own sudden death, there would have been a
new feature in his act of intemperance--a feature of presumption and
irreverence, as in one that, having known himself drawing near to the
presence of God, should have suited his demeanour to an expectation
so awful. But this is no part of the case supposed. And the only new
element in the man's act is not any element of special immorality, but
simply of special misfortune.

The other remark has reference to the meaning of the word _sudden_.
Very possibly Cæsar and the Christian Church do not differ in the way
supposed,--that is, do not differ by any difference of doctrine as
between Pagan and Christian views of the moral temper appropriate
to death; but perhaps they are contemplating different cases. Both
contemplate a violent death, a _Biathanatos_--death that is _biaios_,
or, in other words, death that is brought about, not by internal and
spontaneous change, but by active force having its origin from without.
In this meaning the two authorities agree. Thus far they are in
harmony. But the difference is that the Roman by the word "sudden" means
_unlingering_, whereas the Christian Litany by "sudden death" means a
death _without warning_, consequently without any available summons to
religious preparation. The poor mutineer who kneels down to gather into
his heart the bullets from twelve firelocks of his pitying comrades dies
by a most sudden death in Cæsar's sense; one shock, one mighty spasm,
one (possibly _not_ one) groan, and all is over. But, in the sense
of the Litany, the mutineer's death is far from sudden: his offence
originally, his imprisonment, his trial, the interval between his
sentence and its execution, having all furnished him with separate
warnings of his fate--having all summoned him to meet it with solemn
preparation.

Here at once, in this sharp verbal distinction, we comprehend the
faithful earnestness with which a holy Christian Church pleads on behalf
of her poor departing children that God would vouchsafe to them the
last great privilege and distinction possible on a death-bed, viz.,
the opportunity of untroubled preparation for facing this mighty trial.
Sudden death, as a mere variety in the modes of dying where death in
some shape is inevitable, proposes a question of choice which, equally
in the Roman and the Christian sense, will be variously answered
according to each man's variety of temperament. Meantime, one aspect of
sudden death there is, one modification, upon which no doubt can
arise, that of all martyrdoms it is the most agitating--viz., where it
surprises a man under circumstances which offer (or which seem to offer)
some hurrying, flying, inappreciably minute chance of evading it. Sudden
as the danger which it affronts must be any effort by which such an
evasion can be accomplished. Even _that_, even the sickening necessity
for hurrying in extremity where all hurry seems destined to be
vain,--even that anguish is liable to a hideous exasperation in one
particular case: viz., where the appeal is made not exclusively to the
instinct of self-preservation, but to the conscience, on behalf of some
other life besides your own, accidentally thrown upon _your_ protection.
To fail, to collapse in a service merely your own, might seem
comparatively venial; though, in fact, it is far from venial. But to
fail in a case where Providence has suddenly thrown into your hands the
final interests of another,--a fellow creature shuddering between the
gates of life and death: this, to a man of apprehensive conscience,
would mingle the misery of an atrocious criminality with the misery of a
bloody calamity. You are called upon, by the case supposed, possibly to
die, but to die at the very moment when, by any even partial failure or
effeminate collapse of your energies, you will be self-denounced as a
murderer. You had but the twinkling of an eye for your effort, and that
effort might have been unavailing; but to have risen to the level of
such an effort would have rescued you, though not from dying, yet from
dying as a traitor to your final and farewell duty.

The situation here contemplated exposes a dreadful ulcer, lurking far
down in the depths of human nature. It is not that men generally are
summoned to face such awful trials. But potentially, and in shadowy
outline, such a trial is moving subterraneously in perhaps all men's
natures. Upon the secret mirror of our dreams such a trial is darkly
projected, perhaps, to every one of us. That dream, so familiar to
childhood, of meeting a lion, and, through languishing prostration in
hope and the energies of hope, that constant sequel of lying down before
the lion publishes the secret frailty of human nature--reveals its
deep-seated falsehood to itself--records its abysmal treachery. Perhaps
not one of us escapes that dream; perhaps, as by some sorrowful doom of
man, that dream repeats for every one of us, through every generation,
the original temptation in Eden. Every one of us, in this dream, has a
bait offered to the infirm places of his own individual will; once again
a snare is presented for tempting him into captivity to a luxury of
ruin; once again, as in aboriginal Paradise, the man falls by his
own choice; again, by infinite iteration, the ancient earth groans
to Heaven, through her secret caves, over the weakness of her child.
"Nature, from her seat, sighing through all her works," again "gives
signs of woe that all is lost"; and again the counter-sigh is repeated
to the sorrowing heavens for the endless rebellion against God. It is
not without probability that in the world of dreams every one of us
ratifies for himself the original transgression. In dreams, perhaps
under some secret conflict of the midnight sleeper, lighted up to the
consciousness at the time, but darkened to the memory as soon as all
is finished, each several child of our mysterious race completes for
himself the treason of the aboriginal fall.

The incident, so memorable in itself by its features of horror, and so
scenical by its grouping for the eye, which furnished the text for this
reverie upon _Sudden Death_ occurred to myself in the dead of night,
as a solitary spectator, when seated on the box of the Manchester and
Glasgow mail, in the second or third summer after Waterloo. I find it
necessary to relate the circumstances, because they are such as could
not have occurred unless under a singular combination of accidents.
In those days, the oblique and lateral communications with many rural
post-offices were so arranged, either through necessity or through
defect of system, as to make it requisite for the main north-western
mail (_i.e._, the _down_ mail) on reaching Manchester to halt for a
number of hours; how many, I do not remember; six or seven, I think; but
the result was that, in the ordinary course, the mail recommenced its
journey northwards about midnight. Wearied with the long detention at a
gloomy hotel, I walked out about eleven o'clock at night for the sake
of fresh air; meaning to fall in with the mail and resume my seat at
the post-office. The night, however, being yet dark, as the moon had
scarcely risen, and the streets being at that hour empty, so as to offer
no opportunities for asking the road, I lost my way, and did not reach
the post-office until it was considerably past midnight; but, to my
great relief (as it was important for me to be in Westmoreland by the
morning), I saw in the huge saucer eyes of the mail, blazing through
the gloom, an evidence that my chance was not yet lost. Past the time
it was; but, by some rare accident, the mail was not even yet ready to
start. I ascended to my seat on the box, where my cloak was still lying
as it had lain at the Bridgewater Arms. I had left it there in imitation
of a nautical discoverer, who leaves a bit of bunting on the shore of
his discovery, by way of warning off the ground the whole human race,
and notifying to the Christian and the heathen worlds, with his best
compliments, that he has hoisted his pocket-handkerchief once and for
ever upon that virgin soil: thenceforward claiming the _jus dominii_ to
the top of the atmosphere above it, and also the right of driving shafts
to the centre of the earth below it; so that all people found after this
warning either aloft in upper chambers of the atmosphere, or groping
in subterraneous shafts, or squatting audaciously on the surface of
the soil, will be treated as trespassers--kicked, that is to say,
or decapitated, as circumstances may suggest, by their very faithful
servant, the owner of the said pocket-handkerchief. In the present case,
it is probable that my cloak might not have been respected, and the
_jus gentium_ might have been cruelly violated in my person--for, in
the dark, people commit deeds of darkness, gas being a great ally of
morality; but it so happened that on this night there was no other
outside passenger; and thus the crime, which else was but too probable,
missed fire for want of a criminal.

Having mounted the box, I took a small quantity of laudanum, having
already travelled two hundred and fifty miles--viz., from a point
seventy miles beyond London. In the taking of laudanum there was nothing
extraordinary. But by accident it drew upon me the special attention
of my assessor on the box, the coachman. And in _that_ also there was
nothing extraordinary. But by accident, and with great delight, it drew
my own attention to the fact that this coachman was a monster in point
of bulk, and that he had but one eye. In fact, he had been foretold by
Virgil as

  "Monstrum horrendum, informe, ingens, cui lumen ademptum."

He answered to the conditions in every one of the items:--1, a monster
he was; 2, dreadful; 3, shapeless; 4, huge; 5, who had lost an eye. But
why should _that_ delight me? Had he been one of the Calendars in the
"Arabian Nights," and had paid down his eye as the price of his criminal
curiosity, what right had _I_ to exult in his misfortune? I did _not_
exult; I delighted in no man's punishment, though it were even merited.
But these personal distinctions (Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5) identified in an
instant an old friend of mine whom I had known in the south for some
years as the most masterly of mail-coachmen. He was the man in all
Europe that could (if _any_ could) have driven six-in-hand full
gallop over _Al Sirat_--that dreadful bridge of Mahomet, with no side
battlements, and of _extra_ room not enough for a razor's edge--leading
right across the bottomless gulf. Under this eminent man, whom in Greek
I cognominated Cyclops _Diphrélates_ (Cyclops the Charioteer), I, and
others known to me, studied the diphrelatic art. Excuse, reader, a word
too elegant to be pedantic. As a pupil, though I paid extra fees, it is
to be lamented that I did not stand high in his esteem. It showed his
dogged honesty (though, observe, not his discernment) that he could
not see my merits. Let us excuse his absurdity in this particular by
remembering his want of an eye. Doubtless _that_ made him blind to my
merits. In the art of conversation, however, he admitted that I had the
whip-hand of him. On the present occasion great joy was at our meeting.
But what was Cyclops doing here? Had the medical men recommended
northern air, or how? I collected, from such explanations as he
volunteered, that he had an interest at stake in some suit-at-law now
pending at Lancaster; so that probably he had got himself transferred
to this station for the purpose of connecting with his professional
pursuits an instant readiness for the calls of his lawsuit.

Meantime, what are we stopping for? Surely we have now waited long
enough. Oh, this procrastinating mail, and this procrastinating
post-office! Can't they take a lesson upon that subject from _me_? Some
people have called _me_ procrastinating. Yet you are witness, reader,
that I was here kept waiting for the post-office. Will the post-office
lay its hand on its heart, in its moments of sobriety, and assert that
ever it waited for me? What are they about? The guard tells me that
there is a large extra accumulation of foreign mails this night, owing
to irregularities caused by war, by wind, by weather, in the packet
service, which as yet does not benefit at all by steam. For an _extra_
hour, it seems, the post-office has been engaged in threshing out the
pure wheaten correspondence of Glasgow, and winnowing it from the chaff
of all baser intermediate towns. But at last all is finished. Sound your
horn, guard! Manchester, good-bye! we've lost an hour by your criminal
conduct at the post-office: which, however, though I do not mean to part
with a serviceable ground of complaint, and one which really _is_ such
for the horses, to me secretly is an advantage, since it compels us to
look sharply for this lost hour amongst the next eight or nine, and to
recover it (if we can) at the rate of one mile extra per hour. Off we
are at last, and at eleven miles an hour; and for the moment I detect no
changes in the energy or in the skill of Cyclops.

From Manchester to Kendal, which virtually (though not in law) is the
capital of Westmoreland, there were at this time seven stages of eleven
miles each. The first five of these, counting from Manchester, terminate
in Lancaster; which is therefore fifty-five miles north of Manchester,
and the same distance exactly from Liverpool. The first three stages
terminate in Preston (called, by way of distinction from other towns
of that name, _Proud_ Preston); at which place it is that the separate
roads from Liverpool and from Manchester to the north become confluent.
[Footnote: "_Confluent_":--Suppose a capital Y (the Pythagorean letter):
Lancaster is at the foot of this letter; Liverpool at the top of the
_right_ branch; Manchester at the top of the _left_; Proud Preston at
the centre, where the two branches unite. It is thirty-three miles
along either of the two branches; it is twenty-two miles along the
stem,--viz., from Preston in the middle to Lancaster at the root.
There's a lesson in geography for the reader!] Within these first three
stages lay the foundation, the progress, and termination of our night's
adventure. During the first stage, I found out that Cyclops was
mortal: he was liable to the shocking affection of sleep--a thing which
previously I had never suspected. If a man indulges in the vicious habit
of sleeping, all the skill in aurigation of Apollo himself, with the
horses of Aurora to execute his notions, avails him nothing. "Oh,
Cyclops!" I exclaimed, "thou art mortal. My friend, thou snorest."
Through the first eleven miles, however, this infirmity--which I grieve
to say that he shared with the whole Pagan Pantheon--betrayed itself
only by brief snatches. On waking up, he made an apology for himself
which, instead of mending matters, laid open a gloomy vista of coming
disasters. The summer assizes, he reminded me, were now going on at
Lancaster: in consequence of which for three nights and three days he
had not lain down on a bed. During the day he was waiting for his own
summons as a witness on the trial in which he was interested, or else,
lest he should be missing at the critical moment, was drinking with the
other witnesses under the pastoral surveillance of the attorneys. During
the night, or that part of it which at sea would form the middle watch,
he was driving. This explanation certainly accounted for his drowsiness,
but in a way which made it much more alarming; since now, after several
days' resistance to this infirmity, at length he was steadily giving
way. Throughout the second stage he grew more and more drowsy. In
the second mile of the third stage he surrendered himself finally and
without a struggle to his perilous temptation. All his past resistance
had but deepened the weight of this final oppression. Seven atmospheres
of sleep rested upon him; and, to consummate the case, our worthy guard,
after singing "Love amongst the Roses" for perhaps thirty times, without
invitation and without applause, had in revenge moodily resigned himself
to slumber--not so deep, doubtless, as the coachman's, but deep enough
for mischief. And thus at last, about ten miles from Preston, it came
about that I found myself left in charge of his Majesty's London and
Glasgow mail, then running at the least twelve miles an hour.

What made this negligence less criminal than else it must have been
thought was the condition of the roads at night during the assizes.
At that time, all the law business of populous Liverpool, and also of
populous Manchester, with its vast cincture of populous rural districts,
was called up by ancient usage to the tribunal of Lilliputian Lancaster.
To break up this old traditional usage required, 1, a conflict with
powerful established interests, 2, a large system of new arrangements,
and 3, a new parliamentary statute. But as yet this change was merely in
contemplation. As things were at present, twice in the year [Footnote:
"_Twice in the year_":--There were at that time only two assizes even
in the most populous counties--viz., the Lent Assizes and the Summer
Assizes.] so vast a body of business rolled northwards from the southern
quarter of the county that for a fortnight at least it occupied the
severe exertions of two judges in its despatch. The consequence of this
was that every horse available for such a service, along the whole line
of road, was exhausted in carrying down the multitudes of people who
were parties to the different suits. By sunset, therefore, it usually
happened that, through utter exhaustion amongst men and horses, the road
sank into profound silence. Except the exhaustion in the vast adjacent
county of York from a contested election, no such silence succeeding to
no such fiery uproar was ever witnessed in England.

On this occasion the usual silence and solitude prevailed along the
road. Not a hoof nor a wheel was to be heard. And, to strengthen this
false luxurious confidence in the noiseless roads, it happened also
that the night was one of peculiar solemnity and peace. For my own
part, though slightly alive to the possibilities of peril, I had so far
yielded to the influence of the mighty calm as to sink into a profound
reverie. The month was August; in the middle of which lay my own
birthday--a festival to every thoughtful man suggesting solemn and often
sigh-born [Footnote: "_Sigh-born_":--I owe the suggestion of this
word to an obscure remembrance of a beautiful phrase in "Giraldus
Cambrensis"--viz., _suspiriosæ cogitationes_.] thoughts. The county was
my own native county--upon which, in its southern section, more than
upon any equal area known to man past or present, had descended the
original curse of labour in its heaviest form, not mastering the bodies
only of men, as of slaves, or criminals in mines, but working through
the fiery will. Upon no equal space of earth was, or ever had been, the
same energy of human power put forth daily. At this particular season
also of the assizes, that dreadful hurricane of flight and pursuit, as
it might have seemed to a stranger, which swept to and from Lancaster
all day long, hunting the county up and down, and regularly subsiding
back into silence about sunset, could not fail (when united with this
permanent distinction of Lancashire as the very metropolis and citadel
of labour) to point the thoughts pathetically upon that counter-vision
of rest, of saintly repose from strife and sorrow, towards which, as
to their secret haven, the profounder aspirations of man's heart are in
solitude continually travelling. Obliquely upon our left we were nearing
the sea; which also must, under the present circumstances, be repeating
the general state of halcyon repose. The sea, the atmosphere, the light,
bore each an orchestral part in this universal lull. Moonlight and the
first timid tremblings of the dawn were by this time blending; and the
blendings were brought into a still more exquisite state of unity by a
slight silvery mist, motionless and dreamy, that covered the woods and
fields, but with a veil of equable transparency. Except the feet of
our own horses,--which, running on a sandy margin of the road, made but
little disturbance,--there was no sound abroad. In the clouds and on the
earth prevailed the same majestic peace; and, in spite of all that
the villain of a schoolmaster has done for the ruin of our sublimer
thoughts, which are the thoughts of our infancy, we still believe in no
such nonsense as a limited atmosphere. Whatever we may swear with our
false feigning lips, in our faithful hearts we still believe, and must
for ever believe, in fields of air traversing the total gulf between
earth and the central heavens. Still, in the confidence of children that
tread without fear every chamber in their father's house, and to whom no
door is closed, we, in that Sabbatic vision which sometimes is revealed
for an hour upon nights like this, ascend with easy steps from the
sorrow-stricken fields of earth upwards to the sandals of God.

Suddenly, from thoughts like these I was awakened to a sullen sound, as
of some motion on the distant road. It stole upon the air for a moment;
I listened in awe; but then it died away. Once roused, however, I could
not but observe with alarm the quickened motion of our horses. Ten
years' experience had made my eye learned in the valuing of motion; and
I saw that we were now running thirteen miles an hour. I pretend to no
presence of mind. On the contrary, my fear is that I am miserably and
shamefully deficient in that quality as regards action. The palsy of
doubt and distraction hangs like some guilty weight of dark unfathomed
remembrances upon my energies when the signal is flying for _action_.
But, on the other hand, this accursed gift I have, as regards _thought_,
that in the first step towards the possibility of a misfortune I see its
total evolution; in the radix of the series I see too certainly and too
instantly its entire expansion; in the first syllable of the dreadful
sentence I read already the last. It was not that I feared for
ourselves. _Us_ our bulk and impetus charmed against peril in any
collision. And I had ridden through too many hundreds of perils that
were frightful to approach, that were matter of laughter to look back
upon, the first face of which was horror, the parting face a jest--for
any anxiety to rest upon _our_ interests. The mail was not built, I
felt assured, nor bespoke, that could betray _me_ who trusted to its
protection. But any carriage that we could meet would be frail and light
in comparison of ourselves. And I remarked this ominous accident of our
situation,--we were on the wrong side of the road. But then, it may be
said, the other party, if other there was, might also be on the wrong
side; and two wrongs might make a right. _That_ was not likely. The same
motive which had drawn _us_ to the right-hand side of the road--viz.,
the luxury of the soft beaten sand as contrasted with the paved
centre--would prove attractive to others. The two adverse carriages
would therefore, to a certainty, be travelling on the same side; and
from this side, as not being ours in law, the crossing over to the other
would, of course, be looked for from _us_. [Footnote: It is true that,
according to the law of the case as established by legal precedents,
all carriages were required to give way before royal equipages, and
therefore before the mail as one of them. But this only increased
the danger, as being a regulation very imperfectly made known, very
unequally enforced, and therefore often embarrassing the movements on
both sides.] Our lamps, still lighted, would give the impression of
vigilance on our part. And every creature that met us would rely upon
_us_ for quartering. [Footnote: "_Quartering_":--This is the technical
word, and, I presume, derived from the French _cartayer_, to evade a
rut or any obstacle.] All this, and if the separate links of the
anticipation had been a thousand times more, I saw, not discursively,
or by effort, or by succession, but by one flash of horrid simultaneous
intuition.

Under this steady though rapid anticipation of the evil which _might_ be
gathering ahead, ah! what a sullen mystery of fear, what a sigh of woe,
was that which stole upon the air, as again the far-off sound of a
wheel was heard! A whisper it was--a whisper from, perhaps, four miles
off--secretly announcing a ruin that, being foreseen, was not the less
inevitable; that, being known, was not therefore healed. What could be
done--who was it that could do it--to check the storm-flight of these
maniacal horses? Could I not seize the reins from the grasp of the
slumbering coachman? You, reader, think that it would have been in
_your_ power to do so. And I quarrel not with your estimate of yourself.
But, from the way in which the coachman's hand was viced between his
upper and lower thigh, this was impossible. Easy was it? See, then,
that bronze equestrian statue. The cruel rider has kept the bit in
his horse's mouth for two centuries. Unbridle him for a minute, if you
please, and wash his mouth with water. Easy was it? Unhorse me, then,
that imperial rider; knock me those marble feet from those marble
stirrups of Charlemagne.

The sounds ahead strengthened, and were now too clearly the sounds of
wheels. Who and what could it be? Was it industry in a taxed cart? Was
it youthful gaiety in a gig? Was it sorrow that loitered, or joy that
raced? For as yet the snatches of sound were too intermitting, from
distance, to decipher the character of the motion. Whoever were the
travellers, something must be done to warn them. Upon the other party
rests the active responsibility, but upon _us_--and, woe is me!
that _us_ was reduced to my frail opium-shattered self--rests the
responsibility of warning. Yet, how should this be accomplished? Might I
not sound the guard's horn? Already, on the first thought, I was making
my way over the roof of the guard's seat. But this, from the accident
which I have mentioned, of the foreign mails being piled upon the roof,
was a difficult and even dangerous attempt to one cramped by nearly
three hundred miles of outside travelling. And, fortunately, before I
had lost much time in the attempt, our frantic horses swept round
an angle of the road which opened upon us that final stage where the
collision must be accomplished and the catastrophe sealed. All was
apparently finished. The court was sitting; the case was heard; the
judge had finished; and only the verdict was yet in arrear.

Before us lay an avenue straight as an arrow, six hundred yards,
perhaps, in length; and the umbrageous trees, which rose in a regular
line from either side, meeting high overhead, gave to it the character
of a cathedral aisle. These trees lent a deeper solemnity to the early
light; but there was still light enough to perceive, at the further end
of this Gothic aisle, a frail reedy gig, in which were seated a young
man, and by his side a young lady. Ah, young sir! what are you about?
If it is requisite that you should whisper your communications to this
young lady--though really I see nobody, at an hour and on a road so
solitary, likely to overhear you--is it therefore requisite that you
should carry your lips forward to hers? The little carriage is creeping
on at one mile an hour; and the parties within it, being thus tenderly
engaged, are naturally bending down their heads. Between them and
eternity, to all human calculation, there is but a minute and a half. Oh
heavens! what is it that I shall do? Speaking or acting, what help can
I offer? Strange it is, and to a mere auditor of the tale might seem
laughable, that I should need a suggestion from the "Iliad" to prompt
the sole resource that remained. Yet so it was. Suddenly I remembered
the shout of Achilles, and its effect. But could I pretend to shout like
the son of Peleus, aided by Pallas? No: but then I needed not the shout
that should alarm all Asia militant; such a shout would suffice as might
carry terror into the hearts of two thoughtless young people and one
gig-horse. I shouted--and the young man heard me not. A second time I
shouted--and now he heard me, for now he raised his head.

Here, then, all had been done that, by me, _could_ be done; more on _my_
part was not possible. Mine had been the first step; the second was for
the young man; the third was for God. If, said I, this stranger is a
brave man, and if indeed he loves the young girl at his side--or, loving
her not, if he feels the obligation, pressing upon every man worthy
to be called a man, of doing his utmost for a woman confided to his
protection--he will at least make some effort to save her. If _that_
fails, he will not perish the more, or by a death more cruel, for having
made it; and he will die as a brave man should, with his face to the
danger, and with his arm about the woman that he sought in vain to
save. But, if he makes no effort,--shrinking without a struggle from his
duty,--he himself will not the less certainly perish for this baseness
of poltroonery. He will die no less: and why not? Wherefore should we
grieve that there is one craven less in the world? No; _let_ him perish,
without a pitying thought of ours wasted upon him; and, in that case,
all our grief will be reserved for the fate of the helpless girl who
now, upon the least shadow of failure in _him_, must by the fiercest
of translations--must without time for a prayer--must within seventy
seconds stand before the judgment-seat of God.

But craven he was not: sudden had been the call upon him, and sudden was
his answer to the call. He saw, he heard, he comprehended, the ruin
that was coming down: already its gloomy shadow darkened above him; and
already he was measuring his strength to deal with it. Ah! what a vulgar
thing does courage seem when we see nations buying it and selling it for
a shilling a-day: ah! what a sublime thing does courage seem when some
fearful summons on the great deeps of life carries a man, as if running
before a hurricane, up to the giddy crest of some tumultuous crisis from
which lie two courses, and a voice says to him audibly, "One way lies
hope; take the other, and mourn for ever!" How grand a triumph if, even
then, amidst the raving of all around him, and the frenzy of the danger,
the man is able to confront his situation--is able to retire for a
moment into solitude with God, and to seek his counsel from _Him!_

For seven seconds, it might be, of his seventy, the stranger settled his
countenance steadfastly upon us, as if to search and value every element
in the conflict before him. For five seconds more of his seventy he sat
immovably, like one that mused on some great purpose. For five more,
perhaps, he sat with eyes upraised, like one that prayed in sorrow,
under some extremity of doubt, for light that should guide him to the
better choice. Then suddenly he rose; stood upright; and, by a powerful
strain upon the reins, raising his horse's fore-feet from the ground,
he slewed him round on the pivot of his hind-legs, so as to plant the
little equipage in a position nearly at right angles to ours. Thus far
his condition was not improved; except as a first step had been taken
towards the possibility of a second. If no more were done, nothing was
done; for the little carriage still occupied the very centre of our
path, though in an altered direction. Yet even now it may not be too
late: fifteen of the seventy seconds may still be unexhausted; and one
almighty bound may avail to clear the ground. Hurry, then, hurry! for
the flying moments--_they_ hurry. Oh, hurry, hurry, my brave young
man! for the cruel hoofs of our horses--_they_ also hurry! Fast are the
flying moments, faster are the hoofs of our horses. But fear not for
_him_, if human energy can suffice; faithful was he that drove to his
terrific duty; faithful was the horse to _his_ command. One blow, one
impulse given with voice and hand, by the stranger, one rush from the
horse, one bound as if in the act of rising to a fence, landed the
docile creature's forefeet upon the crown or arching centre of the
road. The larger half of the little equipage had then cleared our
over-towering shadow: _that_ was evident even to my own agitated sight.
But it mattered little that one wreck should float off in safety if upon
the wreck that perished were embarked the human freightage. The rear
part of the carriage--was _that_ certainly beyond the line of absolute
ruin? What power could answer the question? Glance of eye, thought of
man, wing of angel, which of these had speed enough to sweep between the
question and the answer, and divide the one from the other? Light
does not tread upon the steps of light more indivisibly than did our
all-conquering arrival upon the escaping efforts of the gig. _That_ must
the young man have felt too plainly. His back was now turned to us; not
by sight could he any longer communicate with the peril; but, by the
dreadful rattle of our harness, too truly had his ear been instructed
that all was finished as regarded any effort of _his_. Already in
resignation he had rested from his struggle; and perhaps in his heart he
was whispering, "Father, which art in heaven, do Thou finish above what
I on earth have attempted." Faster than ever mill-race we ran past
them in our inexorable flight. Oh, raving of hurricanes that must have
sounded in their young ears at the moment of our transit! Even in
that moment the thunder of collision spoke aloud. Either with the
swingle-bar, or with the haunch of our near leader, we had struck the
off-wheel of the little gig; which stood rather obliquely, and not quite
so far advanced as to be accurately parallel with the near-wheel. The
blow, from the fury of our passage, resounded terrifically. I rose in
horror, to gaze upon the ruins we might have caused. From my elevated
station I looked down, and looked back upon the scene; which in a moment
told its own tale, and wrote all its records on my heart for ever.

Here was the map of the passion that now had finished. The horse was
planted immovably, with his fore-feet upon the paved crest of the
central road. He of the whole party might be supposed untouched by the
passion of death. The little cany carriage--partly, perhaps, from the
violent torsion of the wheels in its recent movement, partly from the
thundering blow we had given to it--as if it sympathised with human
horror, was all alive with tremblings and shiverings. The young man
trembled not, nor shivered. He sat like a rock. But _his_ was the
steadiness of agitation frozen into rest by horror. As yet he dared not
to look round; for he knew that, if anything remained to do, by him it
could no longer be done. And as yet he knew not for certain if their
safety were accomplished. But the lady--

But the lady--! Oh, heavens! will that spectacle ever depart from my
dreams, as she rose and sank upon her seat, sank and rose, threw up her
arms wildly to heaven, clutched at some visionary object in the air,
fainting, praying, raving, despairing? Figure to yourself, reader,
the elements of the case; suffer me to recall before your mind the
circumstances of that unparalleled situation. From the silence and deep
peace of this saintly summer night--from the pathetic blending of this
sweet moonlight, dawnlight, dreamlight--from the manly tenderness of
this flattering, whispering, murmuring love--suddenly as from the
woods and fields--suddenly as from the chambers of the air opening in
revelation--suddenly as from the ground yawning at her feet, leaped upon
her, with the flashing of cataracts, Death the crowned phantom, with all
the equipage of his terrors, and the tiger roar of his voice.

The moments were numbered; the strife was finished; the vision was
closed. In the twinkling of an eye, our flying horses had carried us to
the termination of the umbrageous aisle; at the right angles we wheeled
into our former direction; the turn of the road carried the scene out of
my eyes in an instant, and swept it into my dreams for ever.

Passion of sudden death! that once in youth I read and interpreted by
the shadows of thy averted signs [Footnote: "_Averted signs_":--I read
the course and changes of the lady's agony in the succession of her
involuntary gestures; but it must be remembered that I read all this
from the rear, never once catching the lady's full face, and even her
profile imperfectly.]!--rapture of panic taking the shape (which
amongst tombs in churches I have seen) of woman bursting her sepulchral
bonds--of woman's Ionic form bending forward from the ruins of her
grave with arching foot, with eyes upraised, with clasped adoring
hands--waiting, watching, trembling, praying for the trumpet's call to
rise from dust for ever! Ah, vision too fearful of shuddering humanity
on the brink of almighty abysses!--vision that didst start back, that
didst reel away, like a shrivelling scroll from before the wrath of fire
racing on the wings of the wind! Epilepsy so brief of horror, wherefore
is it that thou canst not die? Passing so suddenly into darkness,
wherefore is it that still thou sheddest thy sad funeral blights upon
the gorgeous mosaics of dreams? Fragment of music too passionate, heard
once, and heard no more, what aileth thee, that thy deep rolling chords
come up at intervals through all the worlds of sleep, and after forty
years have lost no element of horror?

Lo, it is summer--almighty summer! The everlasting gates of life and
summer are thrown open wide; and on the ocean, tranquil and verdant as
a savannah, the unknown lady from the dreadful vision and I myself are
floating--she upon a fairy pinnace, and I upon an English three-decker.
Both of us are wooing gales of festal happiness within the domain of
our common country, within that ancient watery park, within the pathless
chase of ocean, where England takes her pleasure as a huntress through
winter and summer, from the rising to the setting sun. Ah, what a
wilderness of floral beauty was hidden, or was suddenly revealed, upon
the tropic islands through which the pinnace moved! And upon her deck
what a bevy of human flowers: young women how lovely, young men how
noble, that were dancing together, and slowly drifting towards _us_
amidst music and incense, amidst blossoms from forests and gorgeous
corymbi from vintages, amidst natural carolling, and the echoes of sweet
girlish laughter. Slowly the pinnace nears us, gaily she hails us, and
silently she disappears beneath the shadow of our mighty bows. But then,
as at some signal from heaven, the music, and the carols, and the sweet
echoing of girlish laughter--all are hushed. What evil has smitten the
pinnace, meeting or overtaking her? Did ruin to our friends couch within
our own dreadful shadow? Was our shadow the shadow of death? I looked
over the bow for an answer, and, behold! the pinnace was dismantled; the
revel and the revellers were found no more; the glory of the vintage was
dust; and the forests with their beauty were left without a witness upon
the seas. "But where," and I turned to our crew--"where are the lovely
women that danced beneath the awning of flowers and clustering corymbi?
Whither have fled the noble young men that danced with _them_?" Answer
there was none. But suddenly the man at the mast-head, whose countenance
darkened with alarm, cried out, "Sail on the weather beam! Down she
comes upon us: in seventy seconds she also will founder."

I looked to the weather side, and the summer had departed. The sea was
rocking, and shaken with gathering wrath. Upon its surface sat mighty
mists, which grouped themselves into arches and long cathedral aisles.
Down one of these, with the fiery pace of a quarrel from a cross-bow,
ran a frigate right athwart our course. "Are they mad?" some voice
exclaimed from our deck. "Do they woo their ruin?" But in a moment, as
she was close upon us, some impulse of a heady current or local vortex
gave a wheeling bias to her course, and off she forged without a shock.
As she ran past us, high aloft amongst the shrouds stood the lady of
the pinnace. The deeps opened ahead in malice to receive her, towering
surges of foam ran after her, the billows were fierce to catch her. But
far away she was borne into desert spaces of the sea: whilst still by
sight I followed her, as she ran before the howling gale, chased by
angry sea-birds and by maddening billows; still I saw her, as at the
moment when she ran past us, standing amongst the shrouds, with her
white draperies streaming before the wind. There she stood, with hair
dishevelled, one hand clutched amongst the tackling--rising, sinking,
fluttering, trembling, praying; there for leagues I saw her as she
stood, raising at intervals one hand to heaven, amidst the fiery crests
of the pursuing waves and the raving of the storm; until at last, upon
a sound from afar of malicious laughter and mockery, all was hidden for
ever in driving showers; and afterwards, but when I knew not, nor how.

Sweet funeral bells from some incalculable distance, wailing over the
dead that die before the dawn, awakened me as I slept in a boat moored
to some familiar shore. The morning twilight even then was breaking;
and, by the dusky revelations which it spread, I saw a girl, adorned
with a garland of white roses about her head for some great festival,
running along the solitary strand in extremity of haste. Her running
was the running of panic; and often she looked back as to some dreadful
enemy in the rear. But, when I leaped ashore, and followed on her steps
to warn her of a peril in front, alas! from me she fled as from another
peril, and vainly I shouted to her of quicksands that lay ahead. Faster
and faster she ran; round a promontory of rocks she wheeled out of
sight; in an instant I also wheeled round it, but only to see the
treacherous sands gathering above her head. Already her person was
buried; only the fair young head and the diadem of white roses around it
were still visible to the pitying heavens; and, last of all, was visible
one white marble arm. I saw by the early twilight this fair young head,
as it was sinking down to darkness--saw this marble arm, as it rose
above her head and her treacherous grave, tossing, faltering, rising,
clutching, as at some false deceiving hand stretched out from the
clouds--saw this marble arm uttering her dying hope, and then uttering
her dying despair. The head, the diadem, the arm--these all had sunk; at
last over these also the cruel quicksand had closed; and no memorial of
the fair young girl remained on earth, except my own solitary tears, and
the funeral bells from the desert seas, that, rising again more softly,
sang a requiem over the grave of the buried child, and over her blighted
dawn.

I sat, and wept in secret the tears that men have ever given to the
memory of those that died before the dawn, and by the treachery of
earth, our mother. But suddenly the tears and funeral bells were hushed
by a shout as of many nations, and by a roar as from some great king's
artillery, advancing rapidly along the valleys, and heard afar by echoes
from the mountains. "Hush!" I said, as I bent my ear earthwards to
listen--"hush!--this either is the very anarchy of strife, or else"--and
then I listened more profoundly, and whispered as I raised my head--"or
else, oh heavens! it is _victory_ that is final, victory that swallows
up all strife."

Immediately, in trance, I was carried over land and sea to some distant
kingdom, and placed upon a triumphal car, amongst companions crowned
with laurel. The darkness of gathering midnight, brooding over all the
land, hid from us the mighty crowds that were weaving restlessly about
ourselves as a centre: we heard them, but saw them not. Tidings had
arrived, within an hour, of a grandeur that measured itself against
centuries; too full of pathos they were, too full of joy, to utter
themselves by other language than by tears, by restless anthems, and
_Te Deums_ reverberated from the choirs and orchestras of earth. These
tidings we that sat upon the laurelled car had it for our privilege to
publish amongst all nations. And already, by signs audible through the
darkness, by snortings and tramplings, our angry horses, that knew no
fear or fleshly weariness, upbraided us with delay. Wherefore _was_ it
that we delayed? We waited for a secret word, that should bear witness
to the hope of nations as now accomplished for ever. At midnight
the secret word arrived; which word was--_Waterloo and Recovered
Christendom!_ The dreadful word shone by its own light; before us it
went; high above our leaders' heads it rode, and spread a golden light
over the paths which we traversed. Every city, at the presence of the
secret word, threw open its gates. The rivers were conscious as we
crossed. All the forests, as we ran along their margins, shivered in
homage to the secret word. And the darkness comprehended it.

Two hours after midnight we approached a mighty Minster. Its gates,
which rose to the clouds, were closed. But, when the dreadful word that
rode before us reached them with its golden light, silently they moved
back upon their hinges; and at a flying gallop our equipage entered the
grand aisle of the cathedral. Headlong was our pace; and at every altar,
in the little chapels and oratories to the right hand and left of our
course, the lamps, dying or sickening, kindled anew in sympathy with the
secret word that was flying past. Forty leagues we might have run in the
cathedral, and as yet no strength of morning light had reached us, when
before us we saw the aerial galleries of organ and choir. Every pinnacle
of fretwork, every station of advantage amongst the traceries, was
crested by white-robed choristers that sang deliverance; that wept no
more tears, as once their fathers had wept; but at intervals that sang
together to the generations, saying,

  "Chant the deliverer's praise in every tongue,"

and receiving answers from afar,

  "Such as once in heaven and earth were sung."

And of their chanting was no end; of our headlong pace was neither pause
nor slackening.

Thus as we ran like torrents--thus as we swept with bridal rapture over
the Campo Santo [Footnote: "_Campo Santo_":--It is probable that most
of my readers will be acquainted with the history of the Campo Santo (or
cemetery) at Pisa, composed of earth brought from Jerusalem from a bed
of sanctity as the highest prize which the noble piety of crusaders
could ask or imagine. To readers who are unacquainted with England, or
who (being English) are yet unacquainted with the cathedral cities of
England, it may be right to mention that the graves within-side the
cathedrals often form a flat pavement over which carriages and horses
_might_ run; and perhaps a boyish remembrance of one particular
cathedral, across which I had seen passengers walk and burdens carried,
as about two centuries back they were through the middle of St.
Paul's in London, may have assisted my dream.] of the cathedral
graves--suddenly we became aware of a vast necropolis rising upon
the far-off horizon--a city of sepulchres, built within the saintly
cathedral for the warrior dead that rested from their feuds on earth. Of
purple granite was the necropolis; yet, in the first minute, it lay
like a purple stain upon the horizon, so mighty was the distance. In the
second minute it trembled through many changes, growing into terraces
and towers of wondrous altitude, so mighty was the pace. In the third
minute already, with our dreadful gallop, we were entering its suburbs.
Vast sarcophagi rose on every side, having towers and turrets that, upon
the limits of the central aisle, strode forward with haughty intrusion,
that ran back with mighty shadows into answering recesses. Every
sarcophagus showed many bas-reliefs--bas-reliefs of battles and of
battle-fields; battles from forgotten ages, battles from yesterday;
battle-fields that, long since, nature had healed and reconciled to
herself with the sweet oblivion of flowers; battle-fields that were yet
angry and crimson with carnage. Where the terraces ran, there did _we_
run; where the towers curved, there did _we_ curve. With the flight
of swallows our horses swept round every angle. Like rivers in flood
wheeling round headlands, like hurricanes that ride into the secrets of
forests, faster than ever light unwove the mazes of darkness, our flying
equipage carried earthly passions, kindled warrior instincts, amongst
the dust that lay around us--dust oftentimes of our noble fathers that
had slept in God from Crécy to Trafalgar. And now had we reached the
last sarcophagus, now were we abreast of the last bas-relief, already
had we recovered the arrow-like flight of the illimitable central aisle,
when coming up this aisle to meet us we beheld afar off a female child,
that rode in a carriage as frail as flowers. The mists which went before
her hid the fawns that drew her, but could not hide the shells and
tropic flowers with which she played--but could not hide the lovely
smiles by which she uttered her trust in the mighty cathedral, and in
the cherubim that looked down upon her from the mighty shafts of its
pillars. Face to face she was meeting us; face to face she rode, as
if danger there were none. "Oh, baby!" I exclaimed, "shalt thou be the
ransom for Waterloo? Must we, that carry tidings of great joy to every
people, be messengers of ruin to thee!" In horror I rose at the thought;
but then also, in horror at the thought, rose one that was sculptured
on a bas-relief--a Dying Trumpeter. Solemnly from the field of battle he
rose to his feet; and, unslinging his stony trumpet, carried it, in his
dying anguish, to his stony lips--sounding once, and yet once again;
proclamation that, in _thy_ ears, oh baby! spoke from the battlements of
death. Immediately deep shadows fell between us, and aboriginal silence.
The choir had ceased to sing. The hoofs of our horses, the dreadful
rattle of our harness, the groaning of our wheels, alarmed the graves
no more. By horror the bas-relief had been unlocked unto life. By horror
we, that were so full of life, we men and our horses, with their fiery
fore-legs rising in mid air to their everlasting gallop, were frozen
to a bas-relief. Then a third time the trumpet sounded; the seals were
taken off all pulses; life, and the frenzy of life, tore into their
channels again; again the choir burst forth in sunny grandeur, as from
the muffling of storms and darkness; again the thunderings of our horses
carried temptation into the graves. One cry burst from our lips, as the
clouds, drawing off from the aisle, showed it empty before us.--"Whither
has the infant fled?--is the young child caught up to God?" Lo! afar
off, in a vast recess, rose three mighty windows to the clouds; and on a
level with their summits, at height insuperable to man, rose an altar of
purest alabaster. On its eastern face was trembling a crimson glory.
A glory was it from the reddening dawn that now streamed _through_ the
windows? Was it from the crimson robes of the martyrs painted _on_ the
windows? Was it from the bloody bas-reliefs of earth? There, suddenly,
within that crimson radiance, rose the apparition of a woman's head, and
then of a woman's figure. The child it was--grown up to woman's height.
Clinging to the horns of the altar, voiceless she stood--sinking,
rising, raving, despairing; and behind the volume of incense that, night
and day, streamed upwards from the altar, dimly was seen the fiery font,
and the shadow of that dreadful being who should have baptized her with
the baptism of death. But by her side was kneeling her better angel,
that hid his face with wings; that wept and pleaded for _her_; that
prayed when _she_ could _not_; that fought with Heaven by tears for
_her_ deliverance; which also, as he raised his immortal countenance
from his wings, I saw, by the glory in his eye, that from Heaven he had
won at last.

Then was completed the passion of the mighty fugue. The golden tubes of
the organ, which as yet had but muttered at intervals--gleaming amongst
clouds and surges of incense--threw up, as from fountains unfathomable,
columns of heart-shattering music. Choir and anti-choir were filling
fast with unknown voices. Thou also, Dying Trumpeter, with thy love
that was victorious, and thy anguish that was finishing, didst enter
the tumult; trumpet and echo--farewell love, and farewell anguish--rang
through the dreadful _sanctus_. Oh, darkness of the grave! that from the
crimson altar and from the fiery font wert visited and searched by the
effulgence in the angel's eye--were these indeed thy children? Pomps of
life, that, from the burials of centuries, rose again to the voice of
perfect joy, did ye indeed mingle with the festivals of Death? Lo! as I
looked back for seventy leagues through the mighty cathedral, I saw the
quick and the dead that sang together to God, together that sang to the
generations of man. All the hosts of jubilation, like armies that ride
in pursuit, moved with one step. Us, that, with laurelled heads, were
passing from the cathedral, they overtook, and, as with a garment, they
wrapped us round with thunders greater than our own. As brothers we
moved together; to the dawn that advanced, to the stars that fled;
rendering thanks to God in the highest--that, having hid His face
through one generation behind thick clouds of War, once again was
ascending, from the Campo Santo of Waterloo was ascending, in the
visions of Peace; rendering thanks for thee, young girl! whom having
overshadowed with His ineffable passion of death, suddenly did God
relent, suffered thy angel to turn aside His arm, and even in thee,
sister unknown! shown to me for a moment only to be hidden for ever,
found an occasion to glorify His goodness. A thousand times, amongst
the phantoms of sleep, have I seen thee entering the gates of the golden
dawn, with the secret word riding before thee, with the armies of the
grave behind thee,--seen thee sinking, rising, raving, despairing; a
thousand times in the worlds of sleep have I seen thee followed by
God's angel through storms, through desert seas, through the darkness
of quicksands, through dreams and the dreadful revelations that are in
dreams; only that at the last, with one sling of His victorious arm, He
might snatch thee back from ruin, and might emblazon in thy deliverance
the endless resurrections of His love!

What is to be thought of _her_? What is to be thought of the poor
shepherd girl from the hills and forests of Lorraine, that--like the
Hebrew shepherd boy from the hills and forests of Judea--rose suddenly
out of the quiet, out of the safety, out of the religious inspiration,
rooted in deep pastoral solitudes, to a station in the van of armies,
and to the more perilous station at the right hand of kings? The Hebrew
boy inaugurated his patriotic mission by an _act_, by a victorious
_act_, such as no man could deny. But so did the girl of Lorraine, if
we read her story as it was read by those who saw her nearest. Adverse
armies bore witness to the boy as no pretender; but so they did to the
gentle girl. Judged by the voices of all who saw them _from a station of
good will_, both were found true and loyal to any promises involved in
their first acts. Enemies it was that made the difference between
their subsequent fortunes. The boy rose to a splendour and a noonday
prosperity, both personal and public, that rang through the records
of his people, and became a byword among his posterity for a thousand
years, until the sceptre was departing from Judah. The poor, forsaken
girl, on the contrary, drank not herself from that cup of rest which she
had secured for France. She never sang together with the songs that rose
in her native Domrémy as echoes to the departing steps of invaders.
She mingled not in the festal dances at Vaucouleurs which celebrated in
rapture the redemption of France. No! for her voice was then silent; no!
for her feet were dust. Pure, innocent, noble-hearted girl! whom, from
earliest youth, ever I believed in as full of truth and self-sacrifice,
this was amongst the strongest pledges for _thy_ truth, that never
once--no, not for a moment of weakness--didst thou revel in the vision
of coronets and honour from man. Coronets for thee! Oh, no! Honours,
if they come when all is over, are for those that share thy blood.
[Footnote: "_Those that share thy blood_":--A collateral relative of
Joanna's was subsequently ennobled by the title of _Du Lys_.] Daughter
of Domrémy, when the gratitude of thy king shall awaken, thou wilt be
sleeping the sleep of the dead. Call her, King of France, but she will
not hear thee. Cite her by the apparitors to come and receive a robe
of honour, but she will be found _en contumace_. When the thunders of
universal France, as even yet may happen, shall proclaim the grandeur of
the poor shepherd girl that gave up all for her country, thy ear, young
shepherd girl, will have been deaf for five centuries. To suffer and to
do, that was thy portion in this life; that was thy destiny; and not for
a moment was it hidden from thyself. Life, thou saidst, is short;
and the sleep which is in the grave is long; let me use that life, so
transitory, for the glory of those heavenly dreams destined to comfort
the sleep which is so long! This pure creature--pure from every
suspicion of even a visionary self-interest, even as she was pure
in senses more obvious--never once did this holy child, as regarded
herself, relax from her belief in the darkness that was travelling to
meet her. She might not prefigure the very manner of her death; she saw
not in vision, perhaps, the aerial altitude of the fiery scaffold,
the spectators without end, on every road, pouring into Rouen as to a
coronation, the surging smoke, the volleying flames, the hostile faces
all around, the pitying eye that lurked but here and there, until nature
and imperishable truth broke loose from artificial restraints--these
might not be apparent through the mists of the hurrying future. But the
voice that called her to death, _that_ she heard for ever.

Great was the throne of France even in those days, and great was He that
sat upon it; but well Joanna knew that not the throne, nor he that sat
upon it, was for _her_; but, on the contrary, that she was for _them_;
not she by them, but they by her, should rise from the dust. Gorgeous
were the lilies of France, and for centuries had the privilege to spread
their beauty over land and sea, until, in another century, the wrath
of God and man combined to wither them; but well Joanna knew, early at
Domrémy she had read that bitter truth, that the lilies of France would
decorate no garland for _her_. Flower nor bud, bell nor blossom, would
ever bloom for _her_!

But stay. What reason is there for taking up this subject of Joanna
precisely in the spring of 1847? Might it not have been left till the
spring of 1947, or, perhaps, left till called for? Yes, but it _is_
called for, and clamorously. You are aware, reader, that amongst the
many original thinkers whom modern France has produced, one of the
reputed leaders is M. Michelet. All these writers are of a revolutionary
cast; not in a political sense merely, but in all senses; mad,
oftentimes, as March hares; crazy with the laughing gas of recovered
liberty; drunk with the wine cup of their mighty Revolution, snorting,
whinnying, throwing up their heels, like wild horses in the boundless
pampas, and running races of defiance with snipes, or with the winds, or
with their own shadows, if they can find nothing else to challenge. Some
time or other, I, that have leisure to read, may introduce _you_, that
have not, to two or three dozen of these writers; of whom I can assure
you beforehand that they are often profound, and at intervals are even
as impassioned as if they were come of our best English blood. But now,
confining our attention to M. Michelet, we in England--who know him
best by his worst book, the book against priests, etc.--know him
disadvantageously. That book is a rhapsody of incoherence. But his
"History of France" is quite another thing. A man, in whatsoever craft
he sails, cannot stretch away out of sight when he is linked to the
windings of the shore by towing-ropes of History. Facts, and the
consequences of facts, draw the writer back to the falconer's lure
from the giddiest heights of speculation. Here, therefore--in his
"France"--if not always free from flightiness, if now and then off like
a rocket for an airy wheel in the clouds, M. Michelet, with natural
politeness, never forgets that he has left a large audience waiting
for him on earth, and gazing upward in anxiety for his return; return,
therefore, he does. But History, though clear of certain temptations in
one direction, has separate dangers of its own. It is impossible so to
write a history of France, or of England--works becoming every hour
more indispensable to the inevitably political man of this day--without
perilous openings for error. If I, for instance, on the part of England,
should happen to turn my labours into that channel, and (on the model of
Lord Percy going to Chevy Chase)

  "A vow to God should make
  My pleasure in the Michelet woods
  Three summer days to take,"

probably, from simple delirium, I might hunt M. Michelet into _delirium
tremens_. Two strong angels stand by the side of History, whether French
history or English, as heraldic supporters: the angel of research on
the left hand, that must read millions of dusty parchments, and of pages
blotted with lies; the angel of meditation on the right hand, that must
cleanse these lying records with fire, even as of old the draperies of
_asbestos_ were cleansed, and must quicken them into regenerated life.
Willingly I acknowledge that no man will ever avoid innumerable errors
of detail; with so vast a compass of ground to traverse, this is
impossible; but such errors (though I have a bushel on hand, at M.
Michelet's service) are not the game I chase; it is the bitter and
unfair spirit in which M. Michelet writes against England. Even _that_,
after all, is but my secondary object; the real one is Joanna, the
Pucelle d'Orléans herself.

I am not going to write the history of La Pucelle: to do this, or even
circumstantially to report the history of her persecution and bitter
death, of her struggle with false witnesses and with ensnaring judges,
it would be necessary to have before us _all_ the documents, and
therefore the collection only now forthcoming in Paris. [Footnote:
"_Only now forthcoming_":--In 1847 _began_ the publication (from
official records) of Joanna's trial. It was interrupted, I fear, by the
convulsions of 1848; and whether even yet finished I do not know.] But
_my_ purpose is narrower. There have been great thinkers, disdaining the
careless judgments of contemporaries, who have thrown themselves boldly
on the judgment of a far posterity, that should have had time to review,
to ponder, to compare. There have been great actors on the stage of
tragic humanity that might, with the same depth of confidence, have
appealed from the levity of compatriot friends--too heartless for the
sublime interest of their story, and too impatient for the labour of
sifting its perplexities--to the magnanimity and justice of enemies. To
this class belongs the Maid of Arc. The ancient Romans were too faithful
to the ideal of grandeur in themselves not to relent, after a generation
or two, before the grandeur of Hannibal. Mithridates, a more doubtful
person, yet, merely for the magic perseverance of his indomitable
malice, won from the same Romans the only real honour that ever he
received on earth. And we English have ever shown the same homage to
stubborn enmity. To work unflinchingly for the ruin of England; to say
through life, by word and by deed, _Delenda est Anglia Victrix_!--that
one purpose of malice, faithfully pursued, has quartered some people
upon our national funds of homage as by a perpetual annuity. Better
than an inheritance of service rendered to England herself has sometimes
proved the most insane hatred to England. Hyder Ali, even his son
Tippoo, though so far inferior, and Napoleon, have all benefited by this
disposition among ourselves to exaggerate the merit of diabolic enmity.
Not one of these men was ever capable, in a solitary instance, of
praising an enemy (what do you say to _that_, reader?); and yet in
_their_ behalf, we consent to forget, not their crimes only, but (which
is worse) their hideous bigotry and anti-magnanimous egotism--for
nationality it was not. Suffren, and some half dozen of other French
nautical heroes, because rightly they did us all the mischief they could
(which was really great), are names justly reverenced in England. On the
same principle, La Pucelle d'Orléans, the victorious enemy of England,
has been destined to receive her deepest commemoration from the
magnanimous justice of Englishmen.

Joanna, as we in England should call her, but according to her
own statement, Jeanne (or, as M. Michelet asserts, Jean [Footnote:
"_Jean_":--M. Michelet asserts that there was a mystical meaning at that
era in calling a child _Jean_; it implied a secret commendation of a
child, if not a dedication, to St. John the evangelist, the beloved
disciple, the apostle of love and mysterious visions. But, really, as
the name was so exceedingly common, few people will detect a mystery in
calling a _boy_ by the name of Jack, though it _does_ seem mysterious
to call a girl Jack. It may be less so in France, where a beautiful
practice has always prevailed of giving a boy his mother's
name--preceded and strengthened by a male name, as _Charles Anne_,
_Victor Victoire_. In cases where a mother's memory has been unusually
dear to a son, this vocal memento of her, locked into the circle of
his own name, gives to it the tenderness of a testamentary relic, or a
funeral ring. I presume, therefore, that La Pucelle must have borne the
baptismal name of Jeanne Jean; the latter with no reference, perhaps,
to so sublime a person as St. John, but simply to some relative.]) D'Arc
was born at Domrémy, a village on the marches of Lorraine and Champagne,
and dependent upon the town of Vaucouleurs. I have called her a
Lorrainer, not simply because the word is prettier, but because
Champagne too odiously reminds us English of what are for _us_ imaginary
wines--which, undoubtedly, La Pucelle tasted as rarely as we English: we
English, because the champagne of London is chiefly grown in Devonshire;
La Pucelle, because the champagne of Champagne never, by any chance,
flowed into the fountain of Domrémy, from which only she drank. M.
Michelet will have her to be a _Champenoise_, and for no better
reason than that she "took after her father," who happened to be a
_Champenois_.

These disputes, however, turn on refinements too nice. Domrémy stood
upon the frontiers, and, like other frontiers, produced a _mixed_ race,
representing the _cis_ and the _trans_. A river (it is true) formed the
boundary line at this point--the river Meuse; and _that_, in old days,
might have divided the populations; but in these days it did not; there
were bridges, there were ferries, and weddings crossed from the right
bank to the left. Here lay two great roads, not so much for travellers
that were few, as for armies that were too many by half. These two
roads, one of which was the great highroad between France and Germany,
_decussated_ at this very point; which is a learned way of saying that
they formed a St. Andrew's Cross, or letter X. I hope the compositor
will choose a good large X; in which case the point of intersection, the
_locus_ of conflux and intersection for these four diverging arms,
will finish the reader's geographical education, by showing him to a
hair's-breadth where it was that Domrémy stood. These roads, so grandly
situated, as great trunk arteries between two mighty realms,[Footnote:
And reminding one of that inscription, so justly admired by Paul
Richter, which a Russian Czarina placed on a guide-post near Moscow:
_This is the road that leads to Constantinople._] and haunted for ever
by wars or rumours of wars, decussated (for anything I know to the
contrary) absolutely under Joanna's bedroom window; one rolling away
to the right, past M. D'Arc's old barn, and the other unaccountably
preferring to sweep round that odious man's pig-sty to the left.

On whichever side of the border chance had thrown Joanna, the same love
to France would have been nurtured. For it is a strange fact, noticed
by M. Michelet and others, that the Dukes of Bar and Lorraine had for
generations pursued the policy of eternal warfare with France on their
own account, yet also of eternal amity and league with France in case
anybody else presumed to attack her. Let peace settle upon France, and
before long you might rely upon seeing the little vixen Lorraine flying
at the throat of France. Let France be assailed by a formidable enemy,
and instantly you saw a Duke of Lorraine insisting on having his own
throat cut in support of France; which favour accordingly was cheerfully
granted to him in three great successive battles: twice by the English,
viz., at Crécy and Agincourt, once by the Sultan at Nicopolis.

This sympathy with France during great eclipses, in those that during
ordinary seasons were always teasing her with brawls and guerilla
inroads, strengthened the natural piety to France of those that were
confessedly the children of her own house. The outposts of France, as
one may call the great frontier provinces, were of all localities the
most devoted to the Fleurs de Lys. To witness, at any great crisis, the
generous devotion to these lilies of the little fiery cousin that in
gentler weather was for ever tilting at the breast of France, could not
but fan the zeal of France's legitimate daughters; while to occupy
a post of honour on the frontiers against an old hereditary enemy of
France would naturally stimulate this zeal by a sentiment of martial
pride, by a sense of danger always threatening, and of hatred always
smouldering. That great four-headed road was a perpetual memento to
patriotic ardour. To say "This way lies the road to Paris, and that
other way to Aix-la-Chapelle; this to Prague, that to Vienna," nourished
the warfare of the heart by daily ministrations of sense. The eye that
watched for the gleams of lance or helmet from the hostile frontier, the
ear that listened for the groaning of wheels, made the highroad itself,
with its relations to centres so remote, into a manual of patriotic
duty.

The situation, therefore, _locally_, of Joanna was full of profound
suggestions to a heart that listened for the stealthy steps of change
and fear that too surely were in motion. But, if the place were grand,
the time, the burden of the time, was far more so. The air overhead in
its upper chambers was _hurtling_ with the obscure sound; was dark with
sullen fermenting of storms that had been gathering for a hundred and
thirty years. The battle of Agincourt in Joanna's childhood had reopened
the wounds of France. Crécy and Poictiers, those withering overthrows
for the chivalry of France, had, before Agincourt occurred, been
tranquilised by more than half a century; but this resurrection of their
trumpet wails made the whole series of battles and endless skirmishes
take their stations as parts in one drama. The graves that had closed
sixty years ago seemed to fly open in sympathy with a sorrow that echoed
their own. The monarchy of France laboured in extremity, rocked and
reeled like a ship fighting with the darkness of monsoons. The madness
of the poor king (Charles VI), falling in at such a crisis, like the
case of women labouring in child-birth during the storming of a city,
trebled the awfulness of the time. Even the wild story of the incident
which had immediately occasioned the explosion of this madness--the case
of a man unknown, gloomy, and perhaps maniacal himself, coming out of a
forest at noonday, laying his hand upon the bridle of the king's horse,
checking him for a moment to say, "Oh, king, thou art betrayed," and
then vanishing, no man knew whither, as he had appeared for no man knew
what--fell in with the universal prostration of mind that laid France on
her knees, as before the slow unweaving of some ancient prophetic
doom. The famines, the extraordinary diseases, the insurrections of the
peasantry up and down Europe--these were chords struck from the same
mysterious harp; but these were transitory chords. There had been others
of deeper and more ominous sound. The termination of the Crusades, the
destruction of the Templars, the Papal interdicts, the tragedies caused
or suffered by the house of Anjou, and by the Emperor--these were full
of a more permanent significance. But, since then, the colossal figure
of feudalism was seen standing, as it were on tiptoe, at Crécy, for
flight from earth: that was a revolution unparalleled; yet _that_ was a
trifle by comparison with the more fearful revolutions that were
mining below the Church. By her own internal schisms, by the abominable
spectacle of a double Pope--so that no man, except through political
bias, could even guess which was Heaven's vicegerent, and which the
creature of Hell--the Church was rehearsing, as in still earlier forms
she had already rehearsed, those vast rents in her foundations which no
man should ever heal.

These were the loftiest peaks of the cloudland in the skies that to
the scientific gazer first caught the colors of the _new_ morning in
advance. But the whole vast range alike of sweeping glooms overhead
dwelt upon all meditative minds, even upon those that could not
distinguish the tendencies nor decipher the forms. It was, therefore,
not her own age alone, as affected by its immediate calamities, that lay
with such weight upon Joanna's mind, but her own age as one section in
a vast mysterious drama, unweaving through a century back, and drawing
nearer continually to some dreadful crisis. Cataracts and rapids were
heard roaring ahead; and signs were seen far back, by help of old men's
memories, which answered secretly to signs now coming forward on the
eye, even as locks answer to keys. It was not wonderful that in such a
haunted solitude, with such a haunted heart, Joanna should see angelic
visions, and hear angelic voices. These voices whispered to her for ever
the duty, self-imposed, of delivering France. Five years she listened
to these monitory voices with internal struggles. At length she could
resist no longer. Doubt gave way; and she left her home for ever in
order to present herself at the dauphin's court. The education of this
poor girl was mean according to the present standard: was ineffably
grand, according to a purer philosophic standard: and only not good for
our age because for us it would be unattainable. She read nothing, for
she could not read; but she had heard others read parts of the Roman
martyrology. She wept in sympathy with the sad "Misereres" of the Romish
Church; she rose to heaven with the glad triumphant "Te Deums" of Rome;
she drew her comfort and her vital strength from the rites of the same
Church. But, next after these spiritual advantages, she owed most to the
advantages of her situation. The fountain of Domrémy was on the brink
of a boundless forest; and it was haunted to that degree by fairies that
the parish priest (_curé_) was obliged to read mass there once a year,
in order to keep them in any decent bounds. Fairies are important, even
in a statistical view: certain weeds mark poverty in the soil; fairies
mark its solitude. As surely as the wolf retires before cities does the
fairy sequester herself from the haunts of the licensed victualer. A
village is too much for her nervous delicacy; at most, she can tolerate
a distant view of a hamlet. We may judge, therefore, by the uneasiness
and extra trouble which they gave to the parson, in what strength the
fairies mustered at Domrémy, and, by a satisfactory consequence, how
thinly sown with men and women must have been that region even in its
inhabited spots. But the forests of Domrémy--those were the glories of
the land: for in them abode mysterious powers and ancient secrets
that towered into tragic strength. "Abbeys there were, and abbey
windows"--"like Moorish temples of the Hindoos"--that exercised even
princely power both in Lorraine and in the German Diets. These had their
sweet bells that pierced the forests for many a league at matins or
vespers, and each its own dreamy legend. Few enough, and scattered
enough, were these abbeys, so as in no degree to disturb the deep
solitude of the region; yet many enough to spread a network or awning
of Christian sanctity over what else might have seemed a heathen
wilderness. This sort of religious talisman being secured, a man the
most afraid of ghosts (like myself, suppose, or the reader) becomes
armed into courage to wander for days in their sylvan recesses. The
mountains of the Vosges, on the eastern frontier of France, have never
attracted much notice from Europe, except in 1813-14 for a few brief
months, when they fell within Napoleon's line of defence against the
Allies. But they are interesting for this among other features, that
they do not, like some loftier ranges, repel woods; the forests and the
hills are on sociable terms. "Live and let live" is their motto.
For this reason, in part, these tracts in Lorraine were a favourite
hunting-ground with the Carlovingian princes. About six hundred years
before Joanna's childhood, Charlemagne was known to have hunted there.
That, of itself, was a grand incident in the traditions of a forest or a
chase. In these vast forests, also, were to be found (if anywhere to
be found) those mysterious fawns that tempted solitary hunters into
visionary and perilous pursuits. Here was seen (if anywhere seen) that
ancient stag who was already nine hundred years old, but possibly a
hundred or two more, when met by Charlemagne; and the thing was put
beyond doubt by the inscription upon his golden collar. I believe
Charlemagne knighted the stag; and, if ever he is met again by a king,
he ought to be made an earl, or, being upon the marches of France, a
marquis. Observe, I don't absolutely vouch for all these things: my own
opinion varies. On a fine breezy forenoon I am audaciously sceptical;
but as twilight sets in my credulity grows steadily, till it becomes
equal to anything that could be desired. And I have heard candid
sportsmen declare that, outside of these very forests, they laughed
loudly at all the dim tales connected with their haunted solitudes, but,
on reaching a spot notoriously eighteen miles deep within them, they
agreed with Sir Roger de Coverley that a good deal might be said on both
sides.

Such traditions, or any others that (like the stag) connect distant
generations with each other, are, for that cause, sublime; and the sense
of the shadowy, connected with such appearances that reveal themselves
or not according to circumstances, leaves a colouring of sanctity over
ancient forests, even in those minds that utterly reject the legend as a
fact.

But, apart from all distinct stories of that order, in any solitary
frontier between two great empires--as here, for instance, or in the
desert between Syria and the Euphrates--there is an inevitable tendency,
in minds of any deep sensibility, to people the solitudes with phantom
images of powers that were of old so vast. Joanna, therefore, in her
quiet occupation of a shepherdess, would be led continually to brood
over the political condition of her country by the traditions of the
past no less than by the mementoes of the local present.

M. Michelet, indeed, says that La Pucelle was not a shepherdess. I beg
his pardon; she was. What he rests upon I guess pretty well: it is the
evidence of a woman called Haumette, the most confidential friend of
Joanna. Now, she is a good witness, and a good girl, and I like her; for
she makes a natural and affectionate report of Joanna's ordinary life.
But still, however good she may be as a witness, Joanna is better; and
she, when speaking to the dauphin, calls herself in the Latin report
_Bergereta_. Even Haumette confesses that Joanna tended sheep in her
girlhood. And I believe that, if Miss Haumette were taking coffee along
with me this very evening (February 12, 1847)--in which there would be
no subject for scandal or for maiden blushes, because I am an intense
philosopher, and Miss H. would be hard upon 450 years old--she would
admit the following comment upon her evidence to be right. A
Frenchman, about forty years ago--M. Simond, in his "Travels"--mentions
accidentally the following hideous scene as one steadily observed and
watched by himself in chivalrous France not very long before the French
Revolution: A peasant was plowing; and the team that drew his plow was
a donkey and a woman. Both were regularly harnessed; both pulled alike.
This is bad enough; but the Frenchman adds that, in distributing his
lashes, the peasant was obviously desirous of being impartial; or, if
either of the yokefellows had a right to complain, certainly it was not
the donkey. Now, in any country where such degradation of females could
be tolerated by the state of manners, a woman of delicacy would shrink
from acknowledging, either for herself or her friend, that she had ever
been addicted to any mode of labour not strictly domestic; because, if
once owning herself a prædial servant, she would be sensible that this
confession extended by probability in the hearer's thoughts to the
having incurred indignities of this horrible kind. Haumette clearly
thinks it more dignified for Joanna to have been darning the stockings
of her horny-hoofed father, M. D'Arc, than keeping sheep, lest she might
then be suspected of having ever done something worse. But, luckily,
there was no danger of _that_: Joanna never was in service; and my
opinion is that her father should have mended his own stockings, since
probably he was the party to make the holes in them, as many a better
man than D'Arc does--meaning by _that_ not myself, because, though
probably a better man than D'Arc, I protest against doing anything of
the kind. If I lived even with Friday in Juan Fernandez, either Friday
must do all the darning, or else it must go undone. The better men that
I meant were the sailors in the British navy, every man of whom mends
his own stockings. Who else is to do it? Do you suppose, reader, that
the junior lords of the admiralty are under articles to darn for the
navy?

The reason, meantime, for my systematic hatred of D'Arc is this: There
was a story current in France before the Revolution, framed to ridicule
the pauper aristocracy, who happened to have long pedigrees and short
rent rolls: viz., that a head of such a house, dating from the Crusades,
was overheard saying to his son, a Chevalier of St. Louis, "_Chevalier,
as-tu donné au cochon à manger_?" Now, it is clearly made out by the
surviving evidence that D'Arc would much have preferred continuing to
say, "_Ma fille, as-tu donné au cochon à manger_?" to saying, "_Pucelle
d'Orléans, as-tu sauvé les fleurs-de-lys_?" There is an old English copy
of verses which argues thus:

  "If the man that turnips cries
  Cry not when his father dies,
  Then 'tis plain the man had rather
  Have a turnip than his father."

I cannot say that the logic of these verses was ever _entirely_ to my
satisfaction. I do not see my way through it as clearly as could be
wished. But I see my way most clearly through D'Arc; and the result
is--that he would greatly have preferred not merely a turnip to his
father, but the saving a pound or so of bacon to saving the Oriflamme of
France.

It is probable (as M. Michelet suggests) that the title of Virgin or
Pucelle had in itself, and apart from the miraculous stories about
her, a secret power over the rude soldiery and partisan chiefs of that
period; for in such a person they saw a representative manifestation of
the Virgin Mary, who, in a course of centuries, had grown steadily upon
the popular heart.

As to Joanna's supernatural detection of the dauphin (Charles VII) among
three hundred lords and knights, I am surprised at the credulity which
could ever lend itself to that theatrical juggle. Who admires more than
myself the sublime enthusiasm, the rapturous faith in herself, of this
pure creature? But I am far from admiring stage artifices which not La
Pucelle, but the court, must have arranged; nor can surrender myself
to the conjurer's legerdemain, such as may be seen every day for a
shilling. Southey's "Joan of Arc" was published in 1796. Twenty years
after, talking with Southey, I was surprised to find him still owning a
secret bias in favor of Joan, founded on her detection of the dauphin.
The story, for the benefit of the reader new to the case, was this: La
Pucelle was first made known to the dauphin, and presented to his
court, at Chinon; and here came her first trial. By way of testing
her supernatural pretensions, she was to find out the royal personage
amongst the whole ark of clean and unclean creatures. Failing in this
_coup d'essai_, she would not simply disappoint many a beating heart in
the glittering crowd that on different motives yearned for her success,
but she would ruin herself, and, as the oracle within had told her,
would, by ruining herself, ruin France. Our own Sovereign Lady Victoria
rehearses annually a trial not so severe in degree, but the same in
kind. She "pricks" for sheriffs. Joanna pricked for a king. But observe
the difference: our own Lady pricks for two men out of three; Joanna
for one man out of three hundred. Happy Lady of the Islands and the
Orient!--she _can_ go astray in her choice only by one-half: to the
extent of one-half she _must_ have the satisfaction of being right.
And yet, even with these tight limits to the misery of a boundless
discretion, permit me, Liege Lady, with all loyalty, to submit that now
and then you prick with your pin the wrong man. But the poor child from
Domremy, shrinking under the gaze of a dazzling court--not _because_
dazzling (for in visions she had seen those that were more so), but
because some of them wore a scoffing smile on their features--how should
_she_ throw her line into so deep a river to angle for a king, where
many a gay creature was sporting that masqueraded as kings in dress!
Nay, even more than any true king would have done: for, in Southey's
version of the story, the dauphin says, by way of trying the virgin's
magnetic sympathy with royalty,

        "On the throne,
  I the while mingling with the menial throng,
  Some courtier shall be seated."

This usurper is even crowned: "the jeweled crown shines on a menial's
head." But, really, that is "_un peu fort_"; and the mob of spectators
might raise a scruple whether our friend the jackdaw upon the throne,
and the dauphin himself, were not grazing the shins of treason. For
the dauphin could not lend more than belonged to him. According to the
popular notion, he had no crown for himself; consequently none to lend,
on any pretence whatever, until the consecrated Maid should take him to
Rheims. This was the _popular_ notion in France. But certainly it was
the dauphin's interest to support the popular notion, as he meant to use
the services of Joanna. For if he were king already, what was it that
she could do for him beyond Orleans? That is to say, what more than a
merely _military_ service could she render him? And, above all, if he
were king without a coronation, and without the oil from the sacred
ampulla, what advantage was yet open to him by celerity above his
competitor, the English boy? Now was to be a race for a coronation: he
that should win _that_ race carried the superstition of France along
with him: he that should first be drawn from the ovens of Rheims was
under that superstition baked into a king.

La Pucelle, before she could be allowed to practise as a warrior, was
put through her manual and platoon exercise, as a pupil in divinity, at
the bar of six eminent men in wigs. According to Southey (v. 393, bk.
iii., in the original edition of his "Joan of Arc,") she "appalled the
doctors." It's not easy to do _that_: but they had some reason to
feel bothered, as that surgeon would assuredly feel bothered who, upon
proceeding to dissect a subject, should find the subject retaliating as
a dissector upon himself, especially if Joanna ever made the speech to
them which occupies v. 354-391, bk. iii. It is a double impossibility:
1st, because a piracy from Tindal's "Christianity as old as the
Creation"--a piracy _a parte ante_, and by three centuries; 2d, it is
quite contrary to the evidence on Joanna's trial. Southey's "Joan" of
A.D. 1796 (Cottle, Bristol) tells the doctors, among other secrets,
that she never in her life attended--1st, Mass; nor 2d, the Sacramental
Table; nor 3d, Confession. In the meantime, all this deistical
confession of Joanna's, besides being suicidal for the interest of her
cause, is opposed to the depositions upon _both_ trials. The very best
witness called from first to last deposes that Joanna attended these
rites of her Church even too often; was taxed with doing so; and, by
blushing, owned the charge as a fact, though certainly not as a fault.
Joanna was a girl of natural piety, that saw God in forests and hills
and fountains, but did not the less seek him in chapels and consecrated
oratories.

This peasant girl was self-educated through her own natural
meditativeness. If the reader turns to that divine passage in "Paradise
Regained" which Milton has put into the mouth of our Saviour when first
entering the wilderness, and musing upon the tendency of those great
impulses growing within himself-----

  "Oh, what a multitude of thoughts at once
  Awakened in me swarm, while I consider
  What from within I feel myself, and hear
  What from without comes often to my ears,
  Ill sorting with my present state compared!
  When I was yet a child, no childish play
  To me was pleasing; all my mind was set
  Serious to learn and know, and thence to do,
  What might be public good; myself I thought
  Born to that end----"

he will have some notion of the vast reveries which brooded over the
heart of Joanna in early girlhood, when the wings were budding that
should carry her from Orleans to Rheims; when the golden chariot was
dimly revealing itself that should carry her from the kingdom of _France
Delivered_ to the Eternal Kingdom.

It is not requisite for the honour of Joanna, nor is there in this place
room, to pursue her brief career of _action._ That, though wonderful,
forms the earthly part of her story; the spiritual part is the saintly
passion of her imprisonment, trial, and execution. It is unfortunate,
therefore, for Southey's "Joan of Arc" (which, however, should always
be regarded as a _juvenile_ effort), that precisely when her real glory
begins the poem ends. But this limitation of the interest grew, no
doubt, from the constraint inseparably attached to the law of epic
unity. Joanna's history bisects into two opposite hemispheres, and
both could not have been presented to the eye in one poem, unless by
sacrificing all unity of theme, or else by involving the earlier half,
as a narrative episode, in the latter; which, however, might have been
done, for it might have been communicated to a fellow-prisoner, or
a confessor, by Joanna herself. It is sufficient, as concerns _this_
section of Joanna's life, to say that she fulfilled, to the height of
her promises, the restoration of the prostrate throne. France had become
a province of England, and for the ruin of both, if such a yoke could be
maintained. Dreadful pecuniary exhaustion caused the English energy to
droop; and that critical opening La Pucelle used with a corresponding
felicity of audacity and suddenness (that were in themselves portentous)
for introducing the wedge of French native resources, for rekindling the
national pride, and for planting the dauphin once more upon his feet.
When Joanna appeared, he had been on the point of giving up the struggle
with the English, distressed as they were, and of flying to the south of
France. She taught him to blush for such abject counsels. She liberated
Orleans, that great city, so decisive by its fate for the issue of the
war, and then beleaguered by the English with an elaborate application
of engineering skill unprecedented in Europe. Entering the city after
sunset on the 29th of April, she sang mass on Sunday, May 8th, for the
entire disappearance of the besieging force. On the 29th of June she
fought and gained over the English the decisive battle of Patay; on the
9th of July she took Troyes by a _coup-de-main_ from a mixed garrison
of English and Burgundians; on the 15th of that month she carried the
dauphin into Rheims; on Sunday the 17th she crowned him; and there she
rested from her labour of triumph. All that was to be _done_ she had now
accomplished; what remained was--to _suffer_.

All this forward movement was her own; excepting one man, the whole
council was against her. Her enemies were all that drew power from
earth. Her supporters were her own strong enthusiasm, and the headlong
contagion by which she carried this sublime frenzy into the hearts of
women, of soldiers, and of all who lived by labour. Henceforward she
was thwarted; and the worst error that she committed was to lend the
sanction of her presence to counsels which she had ceased to approve.
But she had now accomplished the capital objects which her own visions
had dictated. These involved all the rest. Errors were now less
important; and doubtless it had now become more difficult for herself to
pronounce authentically what _were_ errors. The noble girl had achieved,
as by a rapture of motion, the capital end of clearing out a free space
around her sovereign, giving him the power to move his arms with effect,
and, secondly, the inappreciable end of winning for that sovereign
what seemed to all France the heavenly ratification of his rights, by
crowning him with the ancient solemnities. She had made it impossible
for the English now to step before her. They were caught in an
irretrievable blunder, owing partly to discord among the uncles of Henry
VI, partly to a want of funds, but partly to the very impossibility
which they believed to press with tenfold force upon any French attempt
to forestall theirs. They laughed at such a thought; and, while they
laughed, _she_ did it. Henceforth the single redress for the English
of this capital oversight, but which never _could_ have redressed it
effectually, was to vitiate and taint the coronation of Charles VII as
the work of a witch. That policy, and not malice (as M. Michelet is
so happy to believe), was the moving principle in the subsequent
prosecution of Joanna. Unless they unhinged the force of the first
coronation in the popular mind by associating it with power given from
hell, they felt that the sceptre of the invader was broken.

But she, the child that, at nineteen, had wrought wonders so great for
France, was she not elated? Did she not lose, as men so often _have_
lost, all sobriety of mind when standing upon the pinnacle of success so
giddy? Let her enemies declare. During the progress of her movement, and
in the centre of ferocious struggles, she had manifested the temper
of her feelings by the pity which she had everywhere expressed for
the suffering enemy. She forwarded to the English leaders a touching
invitation to unite with the French, as brothers, in a common crusade
against infidels--thus opening the road for a soldierly retreat. She
interposed to protect the captive or the wounded; she mourned over the
excesses of her countrymen; she threw herself off her horse to kneel by
the dying English soldier, and to comfort him with such ministrations,
physical or spiritual, as his situation allowed. "Nolebat," says the
evidence, "uti ense suo, aut quemquam interficere." She sheltered
the English that invoked her aid in her own quarters. She wept as she
beheld, stretched on the field of battle, so many brave enemies that had
died without confession. And, as regarded herself, her elation expressed
itself thus: on the day when she had finished her work, she wept; for
she knew that, when her _triumphal_ task was done, her end must be
approaching. Her aspirations pointed only to a place which seemed to her
more than usually full of natural piety, as one in which it would give
her pleasure to die. And she uttered, between smiles and tears, as
a wish that inexpressibly fascinated her heart, and yet was half
fantastic, a broken prayer that God would return her to the solitudes
from which he had drawn her, and suffer her to become a shepherdess once
more. It was a natural prayer, because nature has laid a necessity upon
every human heart to seek for rest and to shrink from torment. Yet,
again, it was a half-fantastic prayer, because, from childhood upward,
visions that she had no power to mistrust, and the voices which sounded
in her ear for ever, had long since persuaded her mind that for _her_ no
such prayer could be granted. Too well she felt that her mission must be
worked out to the end, and that the end was now at hand. All went wrong
from this time. She herself had created the _funds_ out of which the
French restoration should grow; but she was not suffered to witness
their development or their prosperous application. More than one
military plan was entered upon which she did not approve. But she still
continued to expose her person as before. Severe wounds had not taught
her caution. And at length, in a sortie from Compiègne (whether through
treacherous collusion on the part of her own friends is doubtful to this
day), she was made prisoner by the Burgundians, and finally surrendered
to the English.

Now came her trial. This trial, moving of course under English
influence, was conducted in chief by the Bishop of Beauvais. He was
a Frenchman, sold to English interests, and hoping, by favour of the
English leaders, to reach the highest preferment. "Bishop that art,
Archbishop that shalt be, Cardinal that mayest be," were the words that
sounded continually in his ear; and doubtless a whisper of visions still
higher, of a triple crown, and feet upon the necks of kings, sometimes
stole into his heart. M. Michelet is anxious to keep us in mind that
this bishop was but an agent of the English. True. But it does not
better the case for his countryman that, being an accomplice in the
crime, making himself the leader in the persecution against the
helpless girl, he was willing to be all this in the spirit, and with
the conscious vileness of a cat's-paw. Never from the foundations of the
earth was there such a trial as this, if it were laid open in all
its beauty of defence and all its hellishness of attack. Oh, child of
France! shepherdess, peasant girl! trodden under foot by all around
thee, how I honour thy flashing intellect, quick as God's lightning, and
true as God's lightning to its mark, that ran before France and laggard
Europe by many a century, confounding the malice of the ensnarer, and
making dumb the oracles of falsehood! Is it not scandalous, is it not
humiliating to civilization, that, even at this day, France exhibits
the horrid spectacle of judges examining the prisoner against himself;
seducing him, by fraud, into treacherous conclusions against his own
head; using the terrors of their power for extorting confessions from
the frailty of hope; nay (which is worse), using the blandishments
of condescension and snaky kindness for thawing into compliances of
gratitude those whom they had failed to freeze into terror? Wicked
judges! barbarian jurisprudence!--that, sitting in your own conceit
on the summits of social wisdom, have yet failed to learn the first
principles of criminal justice--sit ye humbly and with docility at the
feet of this girl from Domrémy, that tore your webs of cruelty into
shreds and dust. "Would you examine me as a witness against myself?" was
the question by which many times she defied their arts. Continually she
showed that their interrogations were irrelevant to any business before
the court, or that entered into the ridiculous charges against her.
General questions were proposed to her on points of casuistical
divinity; two-edged questions, which not one of themselves could have
answered, without, on the one side, landing himself in heresy (as then
interpreted), or, on the other, in some presumptuous expression of
self-esteem. Next came a wretched Dominican, that pressed her with an
objection, which, if applied to the Bible, would tax every one of its
miracles with unsoundness. The monk had the excuse of never having read
the Bible. M. Michelet has no such excuse; and it makes one blush
for him, as a philosopher, to find him describing such an argument
as "weighty," whereas it is but a varied expression of rude Mahometan
metaphysics. Her answer to this, if there were room to place the whole
in a clear light, was as shattering as it was rapid. Another thought to
entrap her by asking what language the angelic visitors of her solitude
had talked--as though heavenly counsels could want polyglot interpreters
for every word, or that God needed language at all in whispering
thoughts to a human heart. Then came a worse devil, who asked her
whether the Archangel Michael had appeared naked. Not comprehending the
vile insinuation, Joanna, whose poverty suggested to her simplicity that
it might be the _costliness_ of suitable robes which caused the demur,
asked them if they fancied God, who clothed the flowers of the valleys,
unable to find raiment for his servants. The answer of Joanna moves
a smile of tenderness, but the disappointment of her judges makes one
laugh exultingly. Others succeeded by troops, who upbraided her with
leaving her father; as if that greater Father, whom she believed herself
to have been serving, did not retain the power of dispensing with his
own rules, or had not said that for a less cause than martyrdom man and
woman should leave both father and mother.

On Easter Sunday, when the trial had been long proceeding, the poor girl
fell so ill as to cause a belief that she had been poisoned. It was
not poison. Nobody had any interest in hastening a death so certain. M.
Michelet, whose sympathies with all feelings are so quick that one would
gladly see them always as justly directed, reads the case most truly.
Joanna had a twofold malady. She was visited by a paroxysm of the
complaint called _homesickness_. The cruel nature of her imprisonment,
and its length, could not but point her solitary thoughts, in darkness
and in chains (for chained she was), to Domrémy. And the season,
which was the most heavenly period of the spring, added stings to this
yearning. That was one of her maladies--_nostalgia_, as medicine calls
it; the other was weariness and exhaustion from daily combats with
malice. She saw that everybody hated her and thirsted for her blood;
nay, many kind-hearted creatures that would have pitied her profoundly,
as regarded all political charges, had their natural feelings warped by
the belief that she had dealings with fiendish powers. She knew she was
to die; that was _not_ the misery! the misery was that this consummation
could not be reached without so much intermediate strife, as if she were
contending for some chance (where chance was none) of happiness, or were
dreaming for a moment of escaping the inevitable. Why, then, _did_
she contend? Knowing that she would reap nothing from answering her
persecutors, why did she not retire by silence from the superfluous
contest? It was because her quick and eager loyalty to truth would not
suffer her to see it darkened by frauds which _she_ could expose, but
others, even of candid listeners, perhaps, could not; it was through
that imperishable grandeur of soul which taught her to submit meekly
and without a struggle to her punishment, but taught her _not_
to submit--no, not for a moment--to calumny as to facts, or to
misconstruction as to motives. Besides, there were secretaries all
around the court taking down her words. That was meant for no good to
_her_. But the end does not always correspond to the meaning. And
Joanna might say to herself, "These words that will be used against me
to-morrow and the next day, perhaps, in some nobler generation, may rise
again for my justification." Yes, Joanna, they _are_ rising even now in
Paris, and for more than justification!

Woman, sister, there are some things which you do not execute as well as
your brother, man; no, nor ever will. Pardon me if I doubt whether
you will ever produce a great poet from your choirs, or a Mozart, or
a Phidias, or a Michael Angelo, or a great philosopher, or a great
scholar. By which last is meant--not one who depends simply on an
infinite memory, but also on an infinite and electrical power of
combination; bringing together from the four winds, like the angel of
the resurrection, what else were dust from dead men's bones, into the
unity of breathing life. If you _can_ create yourselves into any of
these great creators, why have you not?

Yet, sister woman, though I cannot consent to find a Mozart or a Michael
Angelo in your sex, cheerfully, and with the love that burns in depths
of admiration, I acknowledge that you can do one thing as well as the
best of us men--a greater thing than even Milton is known to have done,
or Michael Angelo; you can die grandly, and as goddesses would die, were
goddesses mortal. If any distant worlds (which _may_ be the case) are
so far ahead of us Tellurians in optical resources as to see distinctly
through their telescopes all that we do on earth, what is the grandest
sight to which we ever treat them? St. Peter's at Rome, do you fancy,
on Easter Sunday, or Luxor, or perhaps the Himalayas? Oh, no! my friend;
suggest something better; these are baubles to _them_; they see in other
worlds, in their own, far better toys of the same kind. These, take my
word for it, are nothing. Do you give it up? The finest thing, then, we
have to show them is a scaffold on the morning of execution. I assure
you there is a strong muster in those far telescopic worlds, on any
such morning, of those who happen to find themselves occupying the right
hemisphere for a peep at _us_. How, then, if it be announced in some
such telescopic world by those who make a livelihood of catching
glimpses at our newspapers, whose language they have long since
deciphered, that the poor victim in the morning's sacrifice is a woman?
How, if it be published in that distant world that the sufferer wears
upon her head, in the eyes of many, the garlands of martyrdom? How, if
it should be some Marie Antoinette, the widowed queen, coming forward on
the scaffold, and presenting to the morning air her head, turned gray by
sorrow--daughter of Caesars kneeling down humbly to kiss the guillotine,
as one that worships death? How, if it were the noble Charlotte Corday,
that in the bloom of youth, that with the loveliest of persons, that
with homage waiting upon her smiles wherever she turned her face to
scatter them--homage that followed those smiles as surely as the carols
of birds, after showers in spring, follow the reappearing sun and the
racing of sunbeams over the hills--yet thought all these things cheaper
than the dust upon her sandals, in comparison of deliverance from hell
for her dear suffering France! Ah! these were spectacles indeed for
those sympathising people in distant worlds; and some, perhaps, would
suffer a sort of martyrdom themselves, because they could not testify
their wrath, could not bear witness to the strength of love and to the
fury of hatred that burned within them at such scenes, could not
gather into golden urns some of that glorious dust which rested in the
catacombs of earth.

On the Wednesday after Trinity Sunday in 1431, being then about nineteen
years of age, the Maid of Arc underwent her martyrdom. She was conducted
before mid-day, guarded by eight hundred spearmen, to a platform of
prodigious height, constructed of wooden billets supported by occasional
walls of lath and plaster, and traversed by hollow spaces in every
direction for the creation of air currents. The pile "struck terror,"
says M. Michelet, "by its height"; and, as usual, the English purpose
in this is viewed as one of pure malignity. But there are two ways of
explaining all that. It is probable that the purpose was merciful. On
the circumstances of the execution I shall not linger. Yet, to mark the
almost fatal felicity of M. Michelet in finding out whatever may injure
the English name, at a moment when every reader will be interested
in Joanna's personal appearance, it is really edifying to notice the
ingenuity by which he draws into light from a dark corner a very unjust
account of it, and neglects, though lying upon the highroad, a very
pleasing one. Both are from English pens. Grafton, a chronicler, but
little read, being a stiff-necked John Bull, thought fit to say that
no wonder Joanna should be a virgin, since her "foule face" was a
satisfactory solution of that particular merit. Holinshead, on the other
hand, a chronicler somewhat later, every way more important, and at
one time universally read, has given a very pleasing testimony to the
interesting character of Joanna's person and engaging manners. Neither
of these men lived till the following century, so that personally this
evidence is none at all. Grafton sullenly and carelessly believed as
he wished to believe; Holinshead took pains to inquire, and reports
undoubtedly the general impression of France. But I cite the case
as illustrating M. Michelet's candour. [Footnote: Amongst the many
ebullitions of M. Michelet's fury against us poor English are four which
will be likely to amuse the reader; and they are the more conspicuous
in collision with the justice which he sometimes does us, and the very
indignant admiration which, under some aspects, he grants to us. 1. Our
English literature he admires with some gnashing of teeth. He pronounces
it "fine and sombre," but, I lament to add, "skeptical, Judaic,
Satanic--in a word, antichristian." That Lord Byron should figure as a
member of this diabolical corporation will not surprise men. It _will_
surprise them to hear that Milton is one of its Satanic leaders. Many
are the generous and eloquent Frenchmen, besides Chateaubriand, who
have, in the course of the last thirty years, nobly suspended their own
burning nationality, in order to render a more rapturous homage at the
feet of Milton; and some of them have raised Milton almost to a level
with angelic natures. Not one of them has thought of looking for him
_below_ the earth. As to Shakspere, M. Michelet detects in him a most
extraordinary mare's nest. It is this: he does "not recollect to have
seen the name of God" in any part of his works. On reading such words,
it is natural to rub one's eyes, and suspect that all one has ever seen
in this world may have been a pure ocular delusion. In particular, I
begin myself to suspect that the word "_la gloire_" never occurs in any
Parisian journal. "The great English nation," says M. Michelet, "has one
immense profound vice"--to wit, "pride." Why, really, that may be true;
but we have a neighbour not absolutely clear of an "immense profound
vice," as like ours in colour and shape as cherry to cherry. In short,
M. Michelet thinks us, by fits and starts, admirable--only that we are
detestable; and he would adore some of our authors, were it not that so
intensely he could have wished to kick them.

2. M. Michelet thinks to lodge an arrow in our sides by a very odd
remark upon Thomas à Kempis: which is, that a man of any conceivable
European blood--a Finlander, suppose, or a Zantiote--might have written
Tom; only not an Englishman. Whether an Englishman could have forged Tom
must remain a matter of doubt, unless the thing had been tried long ago.
That problem was intercepted for ever by Tom's perverseness in choosing
to manufacture himself. Yet, since nobody is better aware than M.
Michelet that this very point of Kempis _having_ manufactured Kempis is
furiously and hopelessly litigated, three or four nations claiming to
have forged his work for him, the shocking old doubt will raise
its snaky head once more--whether this forger, who rests in so much
darkness, might not, after all, be of English blood. Tom, it may be
feared, is known to modern English literature chiefly by an irreverent
mention of his name in a line of Peter Pindar's (Dr Wolcot) fifty years
back, where he is described as

        "Kempis Tom,
  Who clearly shows the way to Kingdom Come"

Few in these days can have read him, unless in the Methodist version of
John Wesley Among those few, however, happens to be myself, which arose
from the accident of having, when a boy of eleven, received a copy of
the "De Imitatione Christi" as a bequest from a relation who died
very young, from which cause, and from the external prettiness of
the book--being a Glasgow reprint by the celebrated Foulis, and gaily
bound--I was induced to look into it, and finally read it many times
over, partly out of some sympathy which, even in those days, I had with
its simplicity and devotional fervour, but much more from the savage
delight I found in laughing at Tom's Latinity that, I freely grant to M
Michelet, is inimitable. Yet, after all, it is not certain whether the
original _was_ Latin. But, however that may have been, if it is possible
that M Michelet [Footnote: "_If M. Michelet can be accurate_"--However,
on consideration, this statement does not depend on Michelet. The
bibliographer Barbier has absolutely _specified_ sixty in a separate
dissertation, _soixante traductions_ among those even that have not
escaped the search. The Italian translations are said to be thirty. As
to mere editions, not counting the early MSS. for half a century before
printing was introduced, those in Latin amount to 2000, and those in
French to 1000. Meantime it is very clear to me that this astonishing
popularity so entirely unparalleled in literature, could not have
existed except in Roman Catholic times, nor subsequently have lingered
in any Protestant land. It was the denial of Scripture fountains
to thirsty lands which made this slender rill of Scripture truth so
passionately welcome.] can be accurate in saying that there are no
less than sixty French versions (not editions, observe, but separate
versions) existing of the "De Imitatione," how prodigious must have
been the adaptation of the book to the religious heart of the fifteenth
century! Excepting the Bible, but excepting _that_ only in Protestant
lands, no book known to man has had the same distinction. It is the most
marvellous bibliographical fact on record.

3. Our English girls, it seems, are as faulty in one way as we English
males in another. None of us men could have written the _Opera Omnia_
of Mr. à Kempis; neither could any of our girls have assumed male attire
like La Pucelle. But why? Because, says Michelet, English girls and
German think so much of an indecorum. Well, that is a good fault,
generally speaking. But M. Michelet ought to have remembered a fact in
the martyrologies which justifies both parties--the French heroine for
doing, and the general choir of English girls for _not_ doing. A female
saint, specially renowned in France, had, for a reason as weighty as
Joanna's--viz., expressly to shield her modesty among men--worn a male
military harness. That reason and that example authorised La Pucelle;
but our English girls, as a body, have seldom any such reason, and
certainly no such saintly example, to plead. This excuses _them_. Yet,
still, if it is indispensable to the national character that our young
women should now and then trespass over the frontier of decorum, it then
becomes a patriotic duty in me to assure M. Michelet that we _have_ such
ardent females among us, and in a long series; some detected in naval
hospitals when too sick to remember their disguise; some on fields
of battle; multitudes never detected at all; some only suspected; and
others discharged without noise by war offices and other absurd
people. In our navy, both royal and commercial, and generally from deep
remembrances of slighted love, women have sometimes served in disguise
for many years, taking contentedly their daily allowance of
burgoo, biscuit, or cannon-balls--anything, in short, digestible or
indigestible, that it might please Providence to send. One thing, at
least, is to their credit: never any of these poor masks, with their
deep silent remembrances, have been detected through murmuring, or what
is nautically understood by "skulking." So, for once, M. Michelet has an
_erratum_ to enter upon the fly-leaf of his book in presentation copies.

4. But the last of these ebullitions is the most lively. We English, at
Orleans, and after Orleans (which is not quite so extraordinary, if
all were told), fled before the Maid of Arc. Yes, says M. Michelet, you
_did_: deny it, if you can. Deny it, _mon cher_? I don't mean to
deny it. Running away, in many cases, is a thing so excellent that no
philosopher would, at times, condescend to adopt any other step. All of
us nations in Europe, without one exception, have shown our philosophy
in that way at times. Even people "_qui ne se rendent pas_" have deigned
both to run and to shout, "_Sauve qui peut_!" at odd times of sunset;
though, for my part, I have no pleasure in recalling unpleasant
remembrances to brave men; and yet, really, being so philosophic, they
ought _not_ to be unpleasant. But the amusing feature in M. Michelet's
reproach is the way in which he _improves_ and varies against us the
charge of running, as if he were singing a catch. Listen to him: They
"_showed their backs_" did these English. (Hip, hip, hurrah! three times
three!) "_Behind good walls they let themselves be taken_." (Hip, hip!
nine times nine!) They "_ran as fast as their legs could carry them_"
(Hurrah! twenty-seven times twenty-seven!) They "_ran before a girl_";
they did. (Hurrah! eighty-one times eighty-one!) This reminds one of
criminal indictments on the old model in English courts, where (for fear
the prisoner should escape) the crown lawyer varied the charge perhaps
through forty counts. The law laid its guns so as to rake the accused
at every possible angle. While the indictment was reading, he seemed a
monster of crime in his own eyes; and yet, after all, the poor fellow
had but committed one offence, and not always _that_. N. B.--Not having
the French original at hand, I make my quotations from a friend's copy
of Mr. Walter Kelly's translation; which seems to me faithful, spirited,
and idiomatically English--liable, in fact, only to the single reproach
of occasional provincialisms.]

The circumstantial incidents of the execution, unless with more space
than I can now command, I should be unwilling to relate. I should fear
to injure, by imperfect report, a martyrdom which to myself appears so
unspeakably grand. Yet, for a purpose, pointing not at Joanna, but at M.
Michelet--viz, to convince him that an Englishman is capable of thinking
more highly of La Pucelle than even her admiring countrymen--I shall,
in parting, allude to one or two traits in Joanna's demeanour on the
scaffold, and to one or two in that of the bystanders, which authorise
me in questioning an opinion of his upon this martyr's firmness. The
reader ought to be reminded that Joanna D'Arc was subjected to an
unusually unfair trial of opinion. Any of the elder Christian martyrs
had not much to fear of _personal_ rancour. The martyr was chiefly
regarded as the enemy of Cæsar; at times, also, where any knowledge
of the Christian faith and morals existed, with the enmity that arises
spontaneously in the worldly against the spiritual. But the martyr,
though disloyal, was not supposed to be therefore anti-national; and
still less was _individually_ hateful. What was hated (if anything)
belonged to his class, not to himself separately. Now, Joanna, if hated
at all, was hated personally, and in Rouen on national grounds. Hence
there would be a certainty of calumny arising against _her_ such as
would not affect martyrs in general. That being the case, it would
follow of necessity that some people would impute to her a willingness
to recant. No innocence could escape _that_. Now, had she really
testified this willingness on the scaffold, it would have argued nothing
at all but the weakness of a genial nature shrinking from the instant
approach of torment. And those will often pity that weakness most who,
in their own persons, would yield to it least. Meantime, there never
was a calumny uttered that drew less support from the recorded
circumstances. It rests upon no _positive_ testimony, and it has a
weight of contradicting testimony to stem. And yet, strange to say, M,
Michelet, who at times seems to admire the Maid of Arc as much as I do,
is the one sole writer among her _friends_ who lends some countenance to
this odious slander. His words are that, if she did not utter this word
_recant_ with her lips, she uttered it in her heart. "Whether she _said_
the word is uncertain; but I affirm that she _thought_ it."

Now, I affirm that she did not; not in any sense of the word "_thought_"
applicable to the case. Here is France calumniating La Pucelle; here
is England defending her. M. Michelet can only mean that, on _a priori_
principles, every woman must be presumed liable to such a weakness; that
Joanna was a woman; _ergo_, that she was liable to such a weakness. That
is, he only supposes her to have uttered the word by an argument which
presumes it impossible for anybody to have done otherwise. I, on the
contrary, throw the onus of the argument not on presumable tendencies of
nature, but on the known facts of that morning's execution, as recorded
by multitudes. What else, I demand, than mere weight of metal, absolute
nobility of deportment, broke the vast line of battle then arrayed
against her? What else but her meek, saintly demeanour won, from the
enemies that till now had believed her a witch, tears of rapturous
admiration? "Ten thousand men," says M. Michelet himself--"ten thousand
men wept"; and of these ten thousand the majority were political enemies
knitted together by cords of superstition. What else was it but her
constancy, united with her angelic gentleness, that drove the fanatic
English soldier--who had sworn to throw a fagot on her scaffold as _his_
tribute of abhorrence, that _did_ so, that fulfilled his vow--suddenly
to turn away a penitent for life, saying everywhere that he had seen
a dove rising upon wings to heaven from the ashes where she had stood?
What else drove the executioner to kneel at every shrine for pardon to
_his_ share in the tragedy? And, if all this were insufficient, then I
cite the closing act of her life as valid on her behalf, were all other
testimonies against her. The executioner had been directed to apply his
torch from below. He did so. The fiery smoke rose upward in billowing
volumes. A Dominican monk was then standing almost at her side. Wrapped
up in his sublime office, he saw not the danger, but still persisted
in his prayers. Even then, when the last enemy was racing up the fiery
stairs to seize her, even at that moment did this noblest of girls think
only for _him_, the one friend that would not forsake her, and not
for herself; bidding him with her last breath to care for his own
preservation, but to leave _her_ to God. That girl, whose latest breath
ascended in this sublime expression of self-oblivion, did not utter the
word _recant_ either with her lips or in her heart. No; she did not,
though one should rise from the dead to swear it.

Bishop of Beauvais! thy victim died in fire upon a scaffold--thou upon
a down bed. But, for the departing minutes of life, both are oftentimes
alike. At the farewell crisis, when the gates of death are opening, and
flesh is resting from its struggles, oftentimes the tortured and the
torturer have the same truce from carnal torment; both sink together
into sleep; together both sometimes kindle into dreams. When the mortal
mists were gathering fast upon you two, bishop and shepherd girl--when
the pavilions of life were closing up their shadowy curtains about
you--let us try, through the gigantic glooms, to decipher the flying
features of your separate visions.

The shepherd girl that had delivered France--she, from her dungeon,
she, from her baiting at the stake, she, from her duel with fire, as she
entered her last dream--saw Domrémy, saw the fountain of Domrémy, saw
the pomp of forests in which her childhood had wandered. That
Easter festival which man had denied to her languishing heart--that
resurrection of springtime, which the darkness of dungeons had
intercepted from _her_, hungering after the glorious liberty of
forests--were by God given back into her hands as jewels that had been
stolen from her by robbers. With those, perhaps (for the minutes of
dreams can stretch into ages), was given back to her by God the bliss
of childhood. By special privilege for _her_ might be created, in this
farewell dream, a second childhood, innocent as the first; but not,
like _that_, sad with the gloom of a fearful mission in the rear. This
mission had now been fulfilled. The storm was weathered; the skirts even
of that mighty storm were drawing off. The blood that she was to reckon
for had been exacted; the tears that she was to shed in secret had
been paid to the last. The hatred to herself in all eyes had been faced
steadily, had been suffered, had been survived. And in her last fight
upon the scaffold she had triumphed gloriously; victoriously she had
tasted the stings of death. For all, except this comfort from her
farewell dream, she had died--died amid the tears of ten thousand
enemies--died amid the drums and trumpets of armies--died amid peals
redoubling upon peals, volleys upon volleys, from the saluting clarions
of martyrs.

Bishop of Beauvais! because the guilt-burdened man is in dreams haunted
and waylaid by the most frightful of his crimes, and because upon that
fluctuating mirror--rising (like the mocking mirrors of _mirage_ in
Arabian deserts) from the fens of death-most of all are reflected the
sweet countenances which the man has laid in ruins; therefore I know,
bishop, that you also, entering your final dream, saw Domrémy. That
fountain, of which the witnesses spoke so much, showed itself to your
eyes in pure morning dews; but neither dews, nor the holy dawn, could
cleanse away the bright spots of innocent blood upon its surface. By
the fountain, bishop, you saw a woman seated, that hid her face. But,
as _you_ draw near, the woman raises her wasted features. Would Domrémy
know them again for the features of her child? Ah, but _you_ know them,
bishop, well! Oh, mercy! what a groan was _that_ which the servants,
waiting outside the bishop's dream at his bedside, heard from his
labouring heart, as at this moment he turned away from the fountain and
the woman, seeking rest in the forests afar off. Yet not _so_ to escape
the woman, whom once again he must behold before he dies. In the forests
to which he prays for pity, will he find a respite? What a tumult, what
a gathering of feet is there! In glades where only wild deer should run
armies and nations are assembling; towering in the fluctuating crowd
are phantoms that belong to departed hours. There is the great English
Prince, Regent of France. There is my Lord of Winchester, the princely
cardinal, that died and made no sign. There is the bishop of Beauvais,
clinging to the shelter of thickets. What building is that which hands
so rapid are raising? Is it a martyr's scaffold? Will they burn the
child of Domrémy a second time? No; it is a tribunal that rises to the
clouds; and two nations stand around it, waiting for a trial. Shall my
Lord of Beauvais sit again upon the judgment-seat, and again number the
hours for the innocent? Ah, no! he is the prisoner at the bar. Already
all is waiting: the mighty audience is gathered, the Court is hurrying
to their seats, the witnesses are arrayed, the trumpets are sounding,
the judge is taking his place. Oh, but this is sudden! My lord, have you
no counsel? "Counsel I have none; in heaven above, or on earth beneath,
counsellor there is none now that would take a brief from _me_: all
are silent." Is it, indeed, come to this? Alas! the time is short, the
tumult is wondrous, the crowd stretches away into infinity; but yet I
will search in it for somebody to take your brief; I know of somebody
that will be your counsel. Who is this that cometh from Domrémy? Who is
she in bloody coronation robes from Rheims? Who is she that cometh with
blackened flesh from walking the furnaces of Rouen? This is she, the
shepherd girl, counsellor that had none for herself, whom I choose,
bishop, for yours. She it is, I engage, that shall take my lord's brief.
She it is, bishop, that would plead for you; yes, bishop, _she_--when
heaven and earth are silent.

1 6 HE HAD MARRIED THE DAUGHTER OF A DUKE: "Mr. John Palmer, a native of
Bath, and from about 1768 the energetic proprietor of the Theatre Royal
in that city, had been led, by the wretched state in those days of
the means of intercommunication between Bath and London, wand his own
consequent difficulties in arranging for a punctual succession of good
actors at his theatre, to turn his attention to the improvement of the
whole system of Post-Office conveyance, and of locomotive machinery
generally, in the British Islands. The result was a scheme for
superseding, on the great roads at least, the then existing system of
sluggish and irregular stage-coaches, the property of private persons
and companies, by a new system of government coaches, in connexion
with the Post-Office, carrying the mails and also a regulated number of
passengers, with clockwork precision, at a rate of comparative speed,
which he hoped should ultimately be not less than ten miles an hour. The
opposition to the scheme was, of course, enormous; coach proprietors,
innkeepers, the Post-Office officials themselves, were all against
Mr. Palmer; he was voted a crazy enthusiast and a public bore.
Pitt, however, when the scheme was submitted to him, recognized its
feasibility; on the 8th of August 1784 the first mail-coach on Mr.
Palmer's plan started from London at 8 o'clock in the morning and
reached Bristol at 11 o'clock at night; and from that day the success of
the new system was assured.--Mr. Palmer himself, having been appointed
Surveyor and Comptroller-General of the Post-Office, took rank as an
eminent and wealthy public man, M. P. for Bath and what not, and lived
till 1818. De Quincey makes it one of his distinctions that he "had
married the daughter of a duke," and in a footnote to that paragraph he
gives the lady's name as "Lady Madeline Gordon." From an old Debrett,
however, I learn that Lady Madelina Gordon, second daughter of
Alexander, fourth Duke of Gordon, was first married, on the 3d of April
1789, to Sir Robert Sinclair, Bart., and next, on the 25th of November
1805, to _Charles Palmer, of Lockley Park, Berks, Esq._ If Debrett is
right, her second husband was not John Palmer of Mail-Coach celebrity,
and De Quincey is wrong."--MASSON.

"Thirty-seven years ago, or rather more, accident made me, in the dead
of night, and of a night memorably solemn, the solitary witness of an
appalling scene, which threatened instant death in a shape the most
terrific to two young people whom I had no means of assisting, except
in so far as I was able to give them a most hurried warning of their
danger; but even _that_ not until they stood within the very shadow
of the catastrophe, being divided from the most frightful of deaths by
scarcely more, if more at all, than seventy seconds.

"Such was the scene, such in its outline, from which the whole of this
paper radiates as a natural expansion. This scene is circumstantially
narrated in Section the Second, entitled 'The Vision of Sudden Death.'

"But a movement of horror, and of spontaneous recoil from this dreadful
scene, naturally carried the whole of that scene, raised and idealised,
into my dreams, and very soon into a rolling succession of dreams.
The actual scene, as looked down upon from the box of the mail, was
transformed into a dream, as tumultuous and changing as a musical fugue.
This troubled dream is circumstantially reported in Section the Third,
entitled 'Dream-Fugue on the theme of Sudden Death.' What I had beheld
from my seat upon the mail,--the scenical strife of action and passion,
of anguish and fear, as I had there witnessed them moving in ghostly
silence,--this duel between life and death narrowing itself to a
point of such exquisite evanescence as the collision neared; all these
elements of the scene blended, under the law of association, with
the previous and permanent features of distinction investing the mail
itself; which features at that time lay--1st, in velocity unprecedented,
2dly, in the power and beauty of the horses, 3dly, in the official
connexion with the government of a great nation, and, 4thly, in the
function, almost a consecrated function, of publishing and diffusing
through the land the great political events, and especially the great
battles, during a conflict of unparalleled grandeur. These honorary
distinctions are all described circumstantially in the First or
introductory Section ('The Glory of Motion'). The three first were
distinctions maintained at all times; but the fourth and grandest
belonged exclusively to the war with Napoleon; and this it was
which most naturally introduced Waterloo into the dream. Waterloo, I
understand, was the particular feature of the 'Dream-Fugue' which my
censors were least able to account for. Yet surely Waterloo, which, in
common with every other great battle, it had been our special privilege
to publish over all the land, most naturally entered the dream under the
licence of our privilege. If not--if there be anything amiss--let the
Dream be responsible. The Dream is a law to itself; and as well quarrel
with a rainbow for showing, or for _not_ showing, a secondary arch.
So far as I know, every element in the shifting movements of the Dream
derived itself either primarily from the incidents of the actual scene,
or from secondary features associated with the mail. For example, the
cathedral aisle derived itself from the mimic combination of features
which grouped themselves together at the point of approaching
collision--viz. an arrow-like section of the road, six hundred yards
long, under the solemn lights described, with lofty trees meeting
overhead in arches. The guard's horn, again--a humble instrument in
itself--was yet glorified as the organ of publication for so many great
national events. And the incident of the Dying Trumpeter, who rises from
a marble bas-relief, and carries a marble trumpet to his marble lips
for the purpose of warning the female infant, was doubtless secretly
suggested by my own imperfect effort to seize the guard's horn, and to
blow the warning blast. But the Dream knows best; and the Dream, I say
again, is the responsible party."

It was in winter, and in the wintry weather of the year 1803, that I
first entered Oxford with a view to its vast means of education, or
rather with a view to its vast advantages for study. A ludicrous story
is told of a young candidate for clerical orders--that, being asked by
the bishop's chaplain if he had ever "been to Oxford," as a colloquial
expression for having had an academic education, he replied, "No:
but he had twice been to Abingdon": Abingdon being only seven miles
distant. In the same sense I might say that once before I had been
at Oxford: but _that_ was as a transient visitor with Lord W----,[2]
when we were both children. Now, on the contrary, I approached these
venerable towers in the character of a student, and with the purpose
of a long connexion; personally interested in the constitution of the
University, and obscurely anticipating that in this city, or at least
during the period of my nominal attachment to this academic body, the
remoter parts of my future life would unfold before me. All hearts were
at this time occupied with the public interests of the country. The
"sorrow of the time" was ripening to a second harvest. Napoleon had
commenced his Vandal, or rather Hunnish war with Britain, in the spring
of this year, about eight months before; and profound public interest
it was, into which the very coldest hearts entered, that a little
divided with me the else monopolizing awe attached to the solemn act of
launching myself upon the world. That expression may seem too strong
as applied to one who had already been for many months a houseless
wanderer in Wales, and a solitary roamer in the streets of London.
But in those situations, it must be remembered, I was an unknown,
unacknowledged vagrant; and without money I could hardly run much risk,
except of breaking my neck. The perils, the pains, the pleasures, or
the obligations, of the world, scarcely exist in a proper sense for him
who has no funds. Perfect weakness is often secure: it is by imperfect
power, turned against its master, that men are snared and decoyed. Here
in Oxford I should be called upon to commence a sort of establishment
upon the splendid English scale; here I should share in many duties
and responsibilities, and should become henceforth an object of notice
to a large society. Now first becoming separately and individually
answerable for my conduct, and no longer absorbed into the general unit
of a family, I felt myself, for the first time, burthened with the
anxieties of a man, and a member of the world.

Oxford, ancient Mother! hoary with ancestral honours, time-honoured,
and, haply, it may be, time-shattered power--I owe thee nothing! Of thy
vast riches I took not a shilling, though living amongst multitudes who
owed to thee their daily bread. Not the less I owe thee justice; for
that is a universal debt. And at this moment, when I see thee called
to thy audit by unjust and malicious accusers--men with the hearts of
inquisitors and the purposes of robbers--I feel towards thee something
of filial reverence and duty. However, I mean not to speak as an
advocate, but as a conscientious witness in the simplicity of truth;
feeling neither hope nor fear of a personal nature, without fee, and
without favour.

I have been assured from many quarters that the great body of the
public are quite in the dark about the whole manner of living in
our English Universities; and that a considerable portion of that
public, misled by the totally different constitution of Universities
in Scotland, Ireland, and generally on the Continent, as well as by
the different arrangements of collegiate life in those institutions,
are in a state worse than ignorant (that is, more unfavourable to
the truth)--starting, in fact, from prejudices, and absolute errors
of fact, which operate most uncharitably upon their construction
of those insulated statements, which are continually put forward
by designing men. Hence, I can well believe that it will be an
acceptable service, at this particular moment [1835], when the very
constitution of the two English Universities is under the unfriendly
revision of Parliament, when some roving commission may be annually
looked for, under a contingency which I will not utter in words (for
I reverence the doctrine of _[Greek: euphêmismos]_), far worse than
Cromwellian, that is, merely personal, and to winnow the existing
corporation from disaffection to the state--a Henry the Eighth
commission of sequestration, and levelled at the very integrity of
the institution--under such prospects, I can well believe that a true
account of Oxford _as it is_ (which will be valid also for Cambridge)
must be welcome both to friend and foe. And instead of giving this
account didactically, or according to a logical classification of the
various items in the survey, I will give it historically, or according
to the order in which the most important facts of the case opened
themselves before myself, under the accidents of my own personal
inquiry. No situation could be better adapted than my own for eliciting
information; for, whereas most young men come to the University under
circumstances of absolute determination as to the choice of their
particular college, and have, therefore, no cause for search or
inquiry, I, on the contrary, came thither in solitary self-dependence,
and in the loosest state of indetermination.

Every single point of my future position and connection, to what
college I would attach myself, and in which of the two orders open
to my admission I would enrol myself, was left absolutely to my own
election. My coming at all, in this year, arose out of an accident of
conversation. In the latter half of 1803, I was living with my mother
at the Priory of St. J----, a beautiful place which she had in part
planned, and built, but chiefly repaired out of a very ancient Gothic
monastery; when my uncle, a military man, on a visit to England, after
twenty-five years' absence in India, suddenly remarked, that in my case
he should feel it shameful to be "tied to my mother's apron-string,"
for was I not eighteen years old? I answered that certainly I was: but
what could I do? My guardians had the power to control my expenditure
until I should be twenty-one; and they, it was certain, would never
aid my purpose of going to Oxford, having quarrelled with me on
that very point. My uncle, a man of restless activity, spoke to my
mother immediately, I presume, for within one hour I was summoned to
her presence. Among other questions, she put this to me, which is
importantly connected with my future experience at Oxford, and my
coming account of it:--"Your guardians," she prefaced, "still continue
to me your school allowance of £100. To this, for the present, when
your sisters cost me such heavy deductions from my own income, I
cannot undertake to make any addition--that is, you are not to count
upon any. But, of course, you will be free to spend your entire Oxford
vacations, and as much time besides as the rules of your college will
dispense with your attendance, at my house, wherever that may be. On
this understanding, are you willing to undertake an Oxford life, upon
so small an allowance as £100 per annum?" My answer was by a cheerful
and prompt assent. For I felt satisfied, and said as much to my mother,
that, although this might sound, and might really prove, on a common
system of expenditure, ludicrously below the demands of the place,
yet in Oxford, no less than in other cities, it must be possible for
a young man of firm mind to live on a hundred pounds annually, if he
pleased to do so, and to live respectably. I guessed even then how the
matter stood; and so in my own experience I found it. If a young man
were known to be of trivial pursuits, with slight habits of study, and
"strong book-mindedness," naturally enough his college peers who should
happen to be idlers would question his right to court solitude. They
would demand a sight of his warrant of exemption from ordinary usages;
and, finding none, they would see a plain argument of his poverty.
And, doubtless, when this happens to be the sole characteristic point
about a man, and is balanced by no form of personal respectability, it
does so far lead to contempt as to make a man's situation mortifying
and painful; but not more so, I affirm, in Oxford than anywhere else.
Mere defect of power, _as_ such, and where circumstances force it into
violent relief, cannot well be other than a degrading feature in any
man's position. Now, in other cities, the man of £100 a-year never can
be forced into such an invidious insulation--he finds many to keep
him in countenance; but in Oxford he is a sort of monster--he stands
alone in the only class with which he can be compared. So that the
pressure upon Oxford predispositions to contempt is far stronger than
elsewhere; and, consequently, there would be more allowance due, if the
actual contempt were also stronger--which I deny. But, no doubt, in
every climate, and under all meridians, it must be humiliating to be
distinguished by pure defect. Now and for ever, to be weak is in some
sense to be miserable; and simple poverty, without other qualification
or adjunct, is merely defect of power. But, on the other hand, in
Oxford, at least, as much as in any other place I ever knew, talents
and severe habits of study are their own justification. And upon the
strongest possible warrant, viz., my own experience in a college then
recently emerging from habits of riotous dissipation, I can affirm that
a man who pleads known habits of study as his reason for secluding
himself, and for declining the ordinary amusements and wine parties,
will meet with neither molestation nor contempt.

For my part, though neither giving nor accepting invitations for
the first two years of my residence, never but once had I reason to
complain of a sneer, or indeed any allusion whatever to habits which
might be understood to express poverty. Perhaps even then I had no
reason to complain, for my own conduct in that instance was unwise; and
the allusion, though a personality, and so far ill-bred, might be meant
in real kindness. The case was this: I neglected my dress in one point
habitually; that is, I wore clothes until they were threadbare--partly
in the belief that my gown would conceal their main defects, but much
more from carelessness and indisposition to spend upon a tailor what
I had destined for a bookseller. At length, an official person, of
some weight in the college, sent me a message on the subject through
a friend. It was couched in these terms: That, let a man possess what
talents or accomplishments he might, it was not possible for him to
maintain his proper station in the public respect, amongst so many
servants and people servile to external impressions, without some
regard to the elegance of his dress. A reproof so courteously prefaced
I could not take offence at; and at that time I resolved to spend some
cost upon decorating my person. But always it happened that some book,
or set of books,--that passion being absolutely endless, and inexorable
as the grave,--stepped between me and my intentions; until one day,
upon arranging my toilet hastily before dinner, I suddenly made the
discovery that I had no waistcoat (or _vest_, as it is now called,
through conceit or provincialism) which was not torn or otherwise
dilapidated; whereupon, buttoning up my coat to the throat, and drawing
my gown as close about me as possible, I went into the public "hall"
(so is called in Oxford the public eating-room) with no misgiving.
However, I was detected; for a grave man, with a superlatively grave
countenance, who happened on that day to sit next me, but whom I did
not personally know, addressing his friend sitting opposite, begged to
know if he had seen the last Gazette, because he understood that it
contained an Order in Council laying an interdict upon the future use
of waistcoats. His friend replied, with the same perfect gravity, that
it was a great satisfaction to his mind that his Majesty's Government
should have issued so sensible an order; which he trusted would be
soon followed up by an interdict on breeches, they being still more
disagreeable to pay for. This said, without the movement on either side
of a single muscle, the two gentlemen passed to other subjects; and
I inferred, upon the whole, that, having detected my manoeuvre, they
wished to put me on my guard in the only way open to them. At any rate,
this was the sole personality, or equivocal allusion of any sort,
which ever met my ear during the years that I asserted my right to be
as poor as chose. And, certainly, my censors were right, whatever were
the temper in which they spoke, kind or unkind; for a little extra
care in the use of clothes will always, under almost any extremity of
poverty, pay for so much extra cost as is essential to neatness and
decorum, if not even to elegance. They were right, and I was wrong, in
a point which cannot be neglected with impunity.

But, to enter upon my own history, and my sketch of Oxford life.--Late
on a winter's night, in the latter half of December, 1803, when a
snow-storm, and a heavy one, was already gathering in the air, a lazy
Birmingham coach, moving at four and a half miles an hour, brought me
through the long northern suburb of Oxford, to a shabby coach-inn,
situated in the Corn Market. Business was out of the question at that
hour. But the next day I assembled all the acquaintances I had in
the University, or had to my own knowledge; and to them, in council
assembled, propounded my first question: What college would they,
in their superior state of information, recommend to my choice?
This question leads to the first great characteristic of Oxford, as
distinguished from most other Universities. Before me at this moment
lie several newspapers, reporting, at length, the installation in
office (as Chancellor) of the Duke of Wellington. The original Oxford
report, having occasion to mention the particular college from which
the official procession moved, had said, no doubt, that the gates
of University, the halls of University, &c., were at such a point
of time thrown open. But most of the provincial editors, not at all
comprehending that the reference was to an individual college, known by
the name of University College, one of twenty-five such establishments
in Oxford, had regularly corrected it into "gates of _the_ University,"
&c. Here is the first misconception of all strangers. And this feature
of Oxford it is which has drawn such exclamations of astonishment from
foreigners. Lipsius, for example, protested with fervour, on first
seeing this vast establishment of Oxford, that one college of this
University was greater in its power and splendour, that it glorified
and illustrated the honours of literature more conspicuously by the
pomps with which it invested the ministers and machinery of education,
than any entire University of the Continent.

What is a University almost everywhere else? It announces little more,
as respects the academic buildings, than that here is to be found the
place of rendezvous--the exchange, as it were, or, under a different
figure, the _palæstra_ of the various parties connected with the
prosecution of liberal studies. This is their "House of Call," their
general place of muster and parade. Here it is that the professors
and the students converge, with the certainty of meeting each other.
Here, in short, are the lecture-rooms in all the faculties. Well: thus
far we see an arrangement of convenience--that is, of convenience for
one of the parties, namely, the professors. To them it spares the
disagreeable circumstances connected with a private reception of their
students at their own rooms. But to the students it is a pure matter
of indifference. In all this there is certainly no service done to the
cause of good learning which merits a state sanction, or the aid of
national funds. Next, however, comes an academic library, sometimes a
good one; and here commences a real use in giving a national station
to such institutions, because their durable and monumental existence,
liable to no flux or decay from individual caprice, or accidents of
life, and their authentic station, as expressions of the national
grandeur, point them out to the bequests of patriotic citizens. They
fall also under the benefit of another principle--the conservative
feeling of amateurship. Several great collections have been bequeathed
to the British Museum, for instance--not chiefly _as_ a national
institution, and under feelings of nationality, but because, being
such, it was also permanent; and thus the painful labours of collecting
were guaranteed from perishing. Independently of all this, I, for
my part, willingly behold the surplus of national funds dedicated
to the consecration, as it were, of learning, by raising temples to
its honour, even where they answer no purpose of direct use. Next
after the service of religion, I would have the service of learning
externally embellished, recommended to the affections of men, and
hallowed by the votive sculptures, as I may say, of that affection,
gathering in amount from age to age. _Magnificabo apostolatum meum_
is a language almost as becoming to the missionaries and ministers of
knowledge, as to the ambassadors of religion. It is fit that by pompous
architectural monuments a voice may for ever be sounding audibly in
human ears of homage to these powers, and that even alien feelings may
be compelled into secret submission to their influence. Therefore,
amongst the number of those who value such things upon the scale of
direct proximate utility rank not me: that _arithmetica officina_ is
in my ears abominable. But still I affirm that, in our analysis of an
ordinary university, or "college," as it is provincially called, we
have not yet arrived at any element of service rendered to knowledge or
education, large enough to call for very extensive national aid. Honour
has thus far been rendered to the good cause by a public attestation,
and that is well: but no direct promotion has been given to that cause,
no impulse communicated to its progress, such that it can be held out
as a result commensurate to the name and pretensions of a University.
As yet there is nothing accomplished which is beyond the strength of
any little commercial town. And, as to the library in particular,
besides that in all essential departments it might be bought, to order,
by one day's common subscription of Liverpool or Glasgow merchants,
students very rarely indeed have admission to its free use.

What other functions remain to a University? For those which I have
mentioned of furnishing a point of rendezvous to the great body of
professors and students, and a point of concentration to the different
establishments of implements and machinery for elaborate researches
(as, for instance, of books and MSS., in the first place; secondly, of
maps, charts, and globes; and, thirdly, perhaps of the costly apparatus
required for such studies as sideral astronomy, galvanic chemistry
or physiology, &c.); all these are uses which cannot be regarded in
a higher light than as conveniences merely incidental and collateral
to the main views of the founders. There are, then, two much loftier
and more commanding ends met by the idea and constitution of such
institutions, and which first rise to a rank of dignity sufficient to
occupy the views of a legislator, or to warrant a national interest.
These ends are involved: 1st, in the practice of conferring _degrees_,
that is, formal attestations and guarantees of competence to give
advice, instruction, or aid, in the three great branches of liberal
knowledge applicable to human life; 2d, in that appropriation of fixed
funds to fixed professorships, by means of which the uninterrupted
succession of public and authorised teachers is sustained in all the
higher branches of knowledge, from generation to generation, and from
century to century. By the latter result it is secured that the great
well-heads of liberal knowledge and of severe science shall never
grow dry. By the former it is secured that this unfailing fountain
shall be continually applied to the production and to the _tasting_ of
fresh labours in endless succession for the public service, and thus,
in effect, that the great national fountain shall not be a stagnant
reservoir, but, by an endless _derivation_ (to speak in a Roman
metaphor), applied to a system of national irrigation. These are the
two great functions and qualifications of a collegiate incorporation:
one providing to each separate generation its own separate rights of
heirship to all the knowledge accumulated by its predecessors, and
converting a mere casual life-annuity into an estate of inheritance--a
mere fleeting [Greek: agônisma] into a [Greek: ktêma es aei]; the other
securing for this eternal dowry as wide a distribution as possible: the
one function regarding the dimension of _length_ in the endless series
of ages through which it propagates its gifts; the other regarding
the dimension of _breadth_ in the large application throughout any
one generation of these gifts to the public service. Here are grand
functions, high purposes; but neither one nor the other demands any
edifices of stone and marble; neither one nor the other presupposes any
edifice at all built with human hands. A collegiate incorporation, the
church militant of knowledge, in its everlasting struggle with darkness
and error, is, in this respect, like the Church of Christ--that is, it
is always and essentially invisible to the fleshly eye. The pillars
of this church are human champions; its weapons are great truths so
shaped as to meet the shifting forms of error; its armouries are
piled and marshalled in human memories; its cohesion lies in human
zeal, in discipline, in childlike docility; and all its triumphs,
its pomps, and glories, must for ever depend upon talent, upon the
energies of the will, and upon the harmonious co-operation of its
several divisions. Thus far, I say, there is no call made out for _any_
intervention of the architect.

Let me apply all this to Oxford. Among the four functions commonly
recognised by the founders of Universities are--1st, to find a set of
halls or places of meeting; 2d, to find the implements and accessaries
of study; 3d, to secure the succession of teachers and learners; 4th,
to secure the profitable application of their attainments to the
public service. Of these four, the two highest need no buildings; and
the other two, which are mere collateral functions of convenience,
need only a small one. Wherefore, then, and to what end, are the
vast systems of building, the palaces and towers of Oxford? These
are either altogether superfluous, mere badges of ostentation and
luxurious wealth, or they point to some fifth function not so much
as contemplated by other Universities, and, at present, absolutely
and chimerically beyond their means of attainment. Formerly we used
to hear attacks upon the Oxford discipline as fitted to the true
_intellectual_ purposes of a modern education. Those attacks, weak
and most uninstructed in facts, false as to all that they challenged,
and puerile as to what implicitly they propounded for homage, are
silent. But, of late, the battery has been pointed against the Oxford
discipline in its _moral_ aspects, as fitted for the government and
restraint of young men, or even as at all contemplating any such
control. The Beverleys would have us suppose, not only that the great
body of the students are a licentious crew, acknowledging no discipline
or restraints, but that the grave elders of the University, and those
who wield the nominal authority of the place, passively resign the
very shows of power, and connive at general excesses, even when they
do not absolutely authorize them in their personal examples. Now, when
such representations are made, to what standard of a just discipline
is it that these writers would be understood as appealing? Is it to
some ideal, or to some existing and known reality? Would they have
England suppose that they are here comparing the actual Oxford with
some possible hypothetic or imaginable Oxford,--with some ideal case,
that is to say, about which great discussions would arise as to its
feasibility,--or that they are comparing it with some known standard
of discipline actually realized and sustained for generations, in
Leipsic, suppose, or Edinburgh, or Leyden, or Salamanca? This is the
question of questions, to which we may demand an answer; and, according
to that answer, observe the dilemma into which these furciferous
knaves must drop. If they are comparing Oxford simply with some ideal
and better Oxford, in some ideal and better world, in that case all
they have said--waiving its falsehoods of fact--is no more than a
flourish of rhetoric, and the whole discussion may be referred to
the shadowy combats of scholastic declamation-mongers--those mock
gladiators, and _umbratiles doctores_. But if, on the other hand, they
pretend to take their station upon the known basis of some existing
institution,--if they will pretend that, in this impeachment of
Oxford, they are proceeding upon a silent comparison with Edinburgh,
Glasgow, Jena, Leipsic, Padua, &c.,--then are they self-exposed, as
men not only without truth, but without shame. For now comes in, as
a sudden revelation, and as a sort of _deus ex machina_, for the
vindication of the truth, the simple answer to that question proposed
above, Wherefore, and to what end, are the vast edifices of Oxford? A
University, as Universities are in general, needs not, I have shown, to
be a visible body--a building raised with hands. Wherefore, then, is
the _visible_ Oxford? To what _fifth_ end, refining upon the ordinary
ends of such institutions, is the far-stretching system of Oxford
_hospitia_, or monastic hotels, directed by their founders, or applied
by their present possessors? Hearken, reader, to the answer:--

These vast piles are applied to an end absolutely indispensable to any
even tolerable system of discipline, and yet absolutely unattainable
upon any commensurate scale in any other University of Europe. They are
applied to the personal settlement and domestication of the students
within the gates and walls of that college to whose discipline they are
amenable. Everywhere else the young men live _where_ they please and
_as_ they please; necessarily distributed amongst the towns-people;
in any case, therefore, liable to no control or supervision whatever;
and, in those cases where the University forms but a small part of
a vast capital city, as it does in Paris, Edinburgh, Madrid, Vienna,
Berlin, and Petersburg, liable to every mode of positive temptation
and distraction which besiege human life in high-viced and luxurious
communities. Here, therefore, it is a mockery to talk of discipline;
of a nonentity there can be no qualities; and we need not ask for the
description of the discipline in situations where discipline there can
be none. One slight anomaly I have heard of as varying _pro tanto_
the uniform features of this picture. In Glasgow I have heard of an
arrangement by which young academicians are placed in the family of a
professor. Here, as members of a private household, and that household
under the presiding eye of a conscientious, paternal, and judicious
scholar, doubtless they would enjoy as absolute a shelter from peril
and worldly contagion as parents could wish; but not _more_ absolute,
I affirm, than belongs, unavoidably, to the monastic seclusion of an
Oxford college--the gates of which open to no egress after nine o'clock
at night, nor after eleven to any ingress which is not regularly
reported to a proper officer of the establishment. The two forms of
restraint are, as respects the effectual amount of control, equal; and
were they equally diffused, Glasgow and Oxford would, in this point,
stand upon the same level of discipline. But it happens that the
Glasgow case was a personal accident; personal, both as regarded him
who volunteered the exercise of this control, and those who volunteered
to appropriate its benefits; whereas the Oxford case belongs to the
very system, is coextensive with the body of undergraduates, and,
from the very arrangement of Oxford life, is liable to no decay or
intermission.

Here, then, the reader apprehends the first great characteristic
distinction of Oxford--that distinction which extorted the rapturous
admiration of Lipsius as an exponent of enormous wealth, but which I
now mention as applying, with ruinous effect, to the late calumnies
upon Oxford, as an inseparable exponent of her meritorious discipline.
She, most truly and severely an "Alma Mater," gathers all the juvenile
part of her flock within her own fold, and beneath her own vigilant
supervision. In Cambridge there is, so far, a laxer administration of
this rule, that, when any college overflows undergraduates are allowed
to lodge at large in the town. But in Oxford this increase of peril and
discretionary power is thrown by preference upon the senior graduates,
who are seldom below the age of twenty-two or twenty-three; and the
college accommodations are reserved, in almost their whole extent, for
the most youthful part of the society. This extent is prodigious. Even
in my time, upwards of two thousand persons were lodged within the
colleges; none having fewer than two rooms, very many having three, and
men of rank, or luxurious habits, having often large suites of rooms.
But that was a time of war, which Oxford experience has shown to have
operated most disproportionably as a drain upon the numbers disposable
for liberal studies; and the total capacity of the University was far
from being exhausted. There are now, I believe, between five and six
thousand names upon the Oxford books; and more than four thousand,
I understand, of constant residents. So that Oxford is well able to
lodge, and on a very sumptuous scale, a small army of men; which
expression of her great splendour I now mention (as I repeat) purely
as applying to the question of her machinery for enforcing discipline.
This part of her machinery, it will be seen, is unique, and absolutely
peculiar to herself. Other Universities, boasting no such enormous
wealth, cannot be expected to act upon her system of seclusion.
Certainly, I make it no reproach to other Universities, that, not
possessing the means of sequestering their young men from worldly
communion, they must abide by the evils of a laxer discipline. It is
their misfortune, and not their criminal neglect, which consents to
so dismal a relaxation of academic habits. But let them not urge this
misfortune in excuse at one time, and at another virtually disavow it.
Never let _them_ take up a stone to throw at Oxford, upon this element
of a wise education; since in them, through that original vice in their
constitution, the defect of all means for secluding and insulating
their society, discipline is abolished by anticipation--being, in fact,
an impossible thing; for the walls of the college are subservient to no
purpose of life, but only to a purpose of convenience; they converge
the students for the hour or two of what is called lecture; which over,
each undergraduate again becomes _sui juris_, is again absorbed into
the crowds of the world, resorts to whatsoever haunts he chooses, and
finally closes his day at ---- if, in any sense, at home--at a home
which is not merely removed from the supervision and control, but
altogether from the bare knowledge, of his academic superiors. How
far this discipline is well administered in other points at Oxford,
will appear from the rest of my account. But, thus far, at least, it
must be conceded, that Oxford, by and through this one unexampled
distinction--her vast disposable fund of accommodations for junior
members within her own private cloisters--possesses an advantage which
she could not forfeit, if she would, towards an effectual knowledge
of each man's daily habits, and a control over him which is all but
absolute.

This knowledge and this control is much assisted and concentrated by
the division of the University into separate colleges. Here comes
another feature of the Oxford system. Elsewhere the University is a
single college; and this college is the University. But in Oxford the
University expresses, as it were, the army, and the colleges express
the several brigades, or regiments.

To resume, therefore, my own thread of personal narration. On the
next morning after my arrival in Oxford, I assembled a small council
of friends to assist me in determining at which of the various
separate societies I should enter, and whether as a "commoner," or
as a "gentleman commoner." Under the first question was couched the
following latitude of choice: I give the names of the colleges, and
the numerical account of their numbers, as it stood in January 1832;
for this will express, as well as the list of that day (which I do not
accurately know), the _proportions_ of importance amongst them.

Then, besides these colleges, five _Halls_, as they are technically
called (the term _Hall_ implying chiefly that they are societies not
endowed, or not endowed with fellowships as the colleges are), namely:

Such being the names, and general proportions on the scale of local
importance, attached to the different communities, next comes the very
natural question, What are the chief determining motives for guiding
the selection amongst them? These I shall state. First of all, a man
not otherwise interested in the several advantages of the colleges
has, however, in all probability, some choice between a small society
and a large one; and thus far a mere ocular inspection of the list
will serve to fix his preference. For my part, supposing other things
equal, I greatly preferred the most populous college, as being that
in which any single member, who might have reasons for standing aloof
from the general habits of expense, of intervisiting, &c., would have
the best chance of escaping a jealous notice. However, amongst those
"other things" which I presumed equal, one held a high place in my
estimation, which a little inquiry showed to be very far from equal.
All the colleges have chapels, but all have not organs; nor, amongst
those which have, is the same large use made of the organ. Some
preserve the full cathedral service; others do not. Christ Church,
meantime, fulfilled _all_ conditions: for the chapel here happens
to be the cathedral of the diocese; the service, therefore, is full
and ceremonial; the college, also, is far the most splendid, both in
numbers, rank, wealth, and influence. Hither I resolved to go; and
immediately I prepared to call on the head.

The "head," as he is called generically, of an Oxford college (his
_specific_ appellation varies almost with every college--principal,
provost, master, rector, warden, etc.), is a greater man than the
uninitiated suppose. His situation is generally felt as conferring a
degree of rank not much less than episcopal; and, in fact, the head
of Brasenose at that time, who happened to be the Bishop of Bangor,
was not held to rank much above his brothers in office. Such being the
rank of heads generally, _à fortiori_, that of Christ Church was to be
had in reverence; and this I knew. He is always, _ex officio_, dean
of the diocese; and, in his quality of college head, he only, of all
deans that ever were heard of, is uniformly considered a greater man
than his own diocesan. But it happened that the present dean had even
higher titles to consideration. Dr. Cyril Jackson had been tutor to the
Prince of Wales (George IV); he had repeatedly refused a bishopric;
and _that_, perhaps, is entitled to place a man one degree above him
who has accepted one. He was also supposed to have made a bishop, and
afterwards, at least, it is certain that he made his own brother a
bishop. All things weighed, Dr. Cyril Jackson seemed so very great a
personage that I now felt the value of my long intercourse with great
dons in giving me confidence to face a lion of this magnitude.

Those who know Oxford are aware of the peculiar feelings which have
gathered about the name and pretensions of Christ Church; feelings of
superiority and leadership in the members of that college, and often
enough of defiance and jealousy on the part of other colleges. Hence
it happens that you rarely find yourself in a shop, or other place
of public resort, with a Christ-Church man, but he takes occasion,
if young and frivolous, to talk loudly of the Dean, as an indirect
expression of his own connection with this splendid college; the title
of _Dean_ being exclusively attached to the headship of Christ Church.
The Dean, as maybe supposed, partakes in this superior dignity of his
"House"; he is officially brought into connection with all orders
of the British aristocracy--often with royal personages; and with
the younger branches of the aristocracy his office places him in a
relation of authority and guardianship--exercised, however, through
inferior ministry, and seldom by direct personal interference. The
reader must understand that, with rare exceptions, all the princes
and nobles of Great Britain who choose to benefit by an academic
education resort either to Christ Church College in Oxford, or to
Trinity College in Cambridge: these are the alternatives. Naturally
enough, my young friends were somewhat startled at my determination to
call upon so great a man; a letter, they fancied, would be a better
mode of application. I, however, who did not adopt the doctrine that
no man is a hero to his valet, was of opinion that very few men indeed
are heroes to themselves. The cloud of external pomp, which invests
them to the eyes of the _attoniti_, cannot exist to their own; they do
not, like Kehama entering the eight gates of Padalon at once, meet and
contemplate their own grandeurs; but, more or less, are conscious of
acting a part. I did not, therefore, feel the tremor which was expected
of a novice, on being ushered into so solemn a presence.

The Dean was sitting in a spacious library or study, elegantly,
if not luxuriously, furnished. Footmen, stationed as repeaters,
as if at some fashionable rout, gave a momentary importance to my
unimportant self, by the thundering tone of their annunciations. All
the machinery of aristocratic life seemed indeed to intrench this
great Don's approaches; and I was really surprised that so very great
a man should condescend to rise on my entrance. But I soon found that,
if the Dean's station and relation to the higher orders had made
him lofty, those same relations had given a peculiar suavity to his
manners. Here, indeed, as on other occasions, I noticed the essential
misconception, as to the demeanour of men of rank, which prevails
amongst those who have no personal access to their presence. In the
fabulous pictures of novels (such novels as once abounded), and in
newspaper reports of conversations, real or pretended, between the King
and inferior persons, we often find the writer expressing _his_ sense
of aristocratic assumption, by making the King address people without
their titles. The Duke of Wellington, for instance, or Lord Liverpool,
figures usually, in such scenes, as "Wellington," or "Arthur," and as
"Liverpool." Now, as to the private talk of George IV in such cases, I
do not pretend to depose; but, speaking generally, I may say that the
practice of the highest classes takes the very opposite course. Nowhere
is a man so sure of his titles or official distinctions as amongst
_them_; for it is upon giving to every man the very extreme punctilio
of his known or supposed claims that they rely for the due observance
of their own. Neglecting no form of courtesy suited to the case, they
seek, in this way, to remind men unceasingly of what they expect; and
the result is what I represent--that people in the highest stations,
and such as bring them continually into contact with inferiors, are,
of all people, the least addicted to insolence or defect of courtesy.
Uniform suavity of manner is indeed rarely found _except_ in men of
high rank. Doubtless this may arise upon a motive of self-interest,
jealous of giving the least opening or invitation to the retorts of
ill-temper or low breeding. But, whatever be its origin, such I believe
to be the fact. In a very long conversation of a general nature upon
the course of my studies, and the present direction of my reading,
Dr. Cyril Jackson treated me just as he would have done his equal in
station and in age. Coming, at length, to the particular purpose of my
visit at this time to himself, he assumed a little more of his official
stateliness. He condescended to say that it would have given him
pleasure to reckon me amongst his flock; "But, sir," he said, in a tone
of some sharpness, "your guardians have acted improperly. It was their
duty to have given me at least one year's notice of their intention to
place you at Christ Church. At present I have not a dog-kennel in my
college untenanted." Upon this, I observed that nothing remained for me
to do but to apologize for having occupied so much of his time; that,
for myself, I now first heard of this preliminary application; and
that, as to my guardians, I was bound to acquit them of all oversight
in this instance, they being no parties to my present scheme. The
Dean expressed his astonishment at this statement. I, on my part,
was just then making my parting bows, and had reached the door, when
a gesture of the Dean's, courteously waving me back to the sofa I had
quitted, invited me to resume my explanations; and I had a conviction
at the moment that the interview would have terminated in the Dean's
suspending his standing rule in my favour. But, just at that moment,
the thundering heralds of the Dean's hall announced some man of high
rank: the sovereign of Christ Church seemed distressed for a moment;
but then, recollecting himself, bowed in a way to indicate that I was
dismissed. And thus it happened that I did not become a member of
Christ Church.

A few days passed in thoughtless indecision. At the end of that time,
a trivial difficulty arose to settle my determination. I had brought
about fifty guineas to Oxford; but the expenses of an Oxford inn, with
almost daily entertainments to young friends, had made such inroads
upon this sum, that, after allowing for the contingencies incident to
a college initiation, enough would not remain to meet the usual demand
for what is called "caution money." This is a small sum, properly
enough demanded of every student, when matriculated, as a pledge for
meeting any loss from unsettled arrears, such as his sudden death or
his unannounced departure might else continually be inflicting upon
his college. By releasing the college, therefore, from all necessity
for degrading vigilance or persecution, this demand does, in effect,
operate beneficially to the feelings of all parties. In most colleges
it amounts to twenty-five pounds: in one only it was considerably less.
And this trifling consideration it was, concurring with a reputation
_at that time_ for relaxed discipline, which finally determined me
in preferring W---- College[6] to all others. This college had the
capital disadvantage, in my eyes, that its chapel possessed no organ,
and no musical service. But any other choice would have driven me to
an instant call for more money--a measure which, as too flagrantly
in contradiction to the whole terms on which I had volunteered to
undertake an Oxford life, I could not find nerves to face.

At Worcester College, therefore, I entered: and here arises the proper
occasion for stating the true costs of an Oxford education. First
comes the question of _lodging_. This item varies, as may be supposed;
but my own case will place on record the two extremes of cost in one
particular college, nowadays differing, I believe, from the general
standard. The first rooms assigned me, being small and ill-lighted,
as part of an old Gothic building, were charged at four guineas a
year. These I soon exchanged for others a little better, and for them
I paid six guineas. Finally, by privilege of seniority, I obtained a
handsome set of well-proportioned rooms, in a modern section of the
college, charged at ten guineas a year. This set was composed of three
rooms; namely, an airy bed-room, a study, and a spacious room for
receiving visitors. This range of accommodation is pretty general in
Oxford, and, upon the whole, may be taken perhaps as representing the
average amount of luxury in this respect, and at the average amount
of cost. The furniture and the fittings up of these rooms cost me
about twenty-five guineas; for the Oxford rule is, that if you take
the rooms (which is at your own option), in that case, you _third_ the
furniture and the embellishments--that is, you succeed to the total
cost diminished by one third. You pay, therefore, two guineas out of
each three to your _immediate_ predecessor. But, as he also may have
succeeded to the furniture upon the same terms, whenever there happens
to have been a rapid succession of occupants, the original cost to
a remote predecessor is sometimes brought down, by this process of
diminution, to a mere fraction of the true value; and yet no individual
occupant can complain of any heavy loss. Whilst upon this subject, I
may observe that, in the seventeenth century, in Milton's time, for
example (about 1624), and for more than sixty years after that era, the
practice of _chumship_ prevailed: every set of chambers was possessed
by two co-occupants; they had generally the same bed-room, and a common
study; and they were called _chums_. This practice, once all but
universal, is now entirely extinct; and the extinction serves to mark
the advance of the country, not so much in luxury as in refinement.

The next item which I shall notice is that which in college bills is
expressed by the word _Tutorage_. This is the same in all colleges,
I believe: viz., ten guineas per annum. And this head suggests an
explanation which is most important to the reputation of Oxford, and
fitted to clear up a very extensive delusion. Some years ago, a most
elaborate statement was circulated of the number and costly endowment
of the Oxford Professorships. Some thirty or more there were, it
was alleged, and five or six only which were not held as absolute
sinecures. Now, this is a charge which I am not here meaning to
discuss. Whether defensible or not, I do not now inquire. It is the
practical interpretation and construction of this charge which I here
wish to rectify. In most Universities, except those of England, the
Professors are the body on whom devolves the whole duty and burthen of
teaching; they compose the sole fountains of instruction; and if these
fountains fail, the fair inference is, that the one great purpose of
the institution is defeated. But this inference, valid for all other
places, is not so for Oxford and Cambridge. And here, again, the
difference arises out of the peculiar distribution of these bodies
into separate and independent colleges. Each college takes upon itself
the regular instruction of its separate inmates--of these and of no
others; and for this office it appoints, after careful selection,
trial, and probation, the best qualified amongst those of its senior
members who choose to undertake a trust of such heavy responsibility.
These officers are called Tutors; and they are connected by duties
and by accountability, not with the University at all, but with their
own private colleges. The Professors, on the other hand, are _public_
functionaries, not connected (as respects the exercise of their
duties) with any college whatsoever--not even with their own--but
altogether and exclusively with the whole University. Besides the
public tutors appointed in each college, on the scale of one to each
dozen or score of students, there are also tutors strictly private,
who attend any students in search of special and extraordinary aid,
on terms settled privately by themselves. Of these persons, or their
existence, the college takes no cognisance; but between the two classes
of tutors, the most studious young men--those who would be most likely
to avail themselves of the lectures read by the professors--have their
whole time pretty severely occupied: and the inference from all this
is, not only that the course of Oxford education would suffer little if
no Professors at all existed, but also that, if the existing Professors
were _ex abundanti_ to volunteer the most exemplary spirit of exertion,
however much this spectacle of conscientious dealing might edify the
University, it would contribute but little to the promotion of academic
purposes. The establishment of Professors is, in fact, a thing of
ornament and pomp. Elsewhere, they are the working servants; but, in
Oxford, the ministers corresponding to them bear another name,--they
are called _Tutors_. These are the working agents in the Oxford system;
and the Professors, with salaries in many cases merely nominal,
are persons sequestered, and properly sequestered, to the solitary
cultivation and advancement of knowledge which a different order of men
is appointed to communicate.

Here let us pause for one moment, to notice another peculiarity in
the Oxford system, upon the tendency of which I shall confidently
make my appeal to the good sense of all unprejudiced readers. I have
said that the _Tutors_ of Oxford correspond to the _Professors_ of
other Universities. But this correspondence, which is absolute and
unquestionable as regards the point then at issue,--viz., where we
are to look for that limb of the establishment on which rests the
main teaching agency,--is liable to considerable qualification,
when we examine the mode of their teaching. In both cases, this is
conveyed by what is termed "lecturing";--but what is the meaning
of a lecture in Oxford and elsewhere? Elsewhere, it means a solemn
dissertation, read, or sometimes histrionically declaimed, by the
Professor. In Oxford, it means an exercise performed orally by the
students, occasionally assisted by the tutor, and subject, in its
whole course, to his corrections, and what may be called his scholia,
or collateral suggestions and improvements. Now, differ as men may as
to other features of the Oxford, compared with the hostile system,
here I conceive that there is no room for doubt or demur. An Oxford
lecture imposes a real _bona fide_ task upon the student; it will not
suffer him to fall asleep, either literally or in the energies of his
understanding; it is a real drill, under the excitement, perhaps, of
personal competition, and under the review of a superior scholar. But,
in Germany, under the declamations of the Professor, the young men are
often literally sleeping; nor is it easy to see how the attention can
be kept from wandering, on this plan, which subjects the auditor to
no risk of sudden question or personal appeal. As to the prizes given
for essays, etc., by the Professors, these have the effect of drawing
forth latent talent, but they can yield no criterion of the attention
paid to the Professor; not to say that the competition for these prizes
is a matter of choice. Sometimes it is true that examinations take
place; but the Oxford lecture is a daily examination; and, waiving
_that_, what chance is there (I would ask) for searching examinations,
for examinations conducted with the requisite _auctoritas_ (or weight
of influence derived from personal qualities), if--which may Heaven
prevent!--the German tenure of Professorships were substituted for
our British one: that is, if for independent and liberal teachers
were substituted poor mercenary haberdashers of knowledge--cap in
hand to opulent students--servile to their caprices--and, at one
blow, degrading the science they profess, the teacher, and the pupil?
Yet I hear that such advice was given to a Royal Commission, sent to
investigate one or more of the Scottish Universities. In the German
Universities, every Professor holds his situation, not on his good
behaviour, but on the capricious pleasure of the young men who resort
to his market. He opens a shop, in fact: others, without limit,
generally men of no credit or known respectability, are allowed to
open rival shops; and the result is, sometimes, that the whole kennel
of scoundrel Professors ruin one another; each standing with his
mouth open, to leap at any bone thrown amongst them from the table of
the "Burschen"; all hating, fighting, calumniating each other, until
the land is sick of its base knowledge-mongers, and would vomit the
loathsome crew, were any natural channel open to their instincts of
abhorrence. The most important of the Scottish Professorships--those
which are fundamentally morticed to the moral institutions of the
land--are upon the footing of Oxford tutorships, as regards emoluments;
that is, they are not suffered to keep up a precarious mendicant
existence, upon the alms of the students, or upon their fickle
admirations. It is made imperative upon a candidate for admission into
the ministry of the Scottish Kirk, that he shall show a certificate of
attendance through a given number of seasons at given lectures.

The next item in the quarterly (or, technically, the _term_) bills of
Oxford is for servants. This, in my college, and, I believe, in all
others, amounted, nominally, to two guineas a year. That sum, however,
was paid to a principal servant, whom, perhaps, you seldom or never
saw; the actual attendance upon yourself being performed by one of
his deputies; and to this deputy--who is, in effect, a _factotum_,
combining in his single person all the functions of chamber-maid,
valet, waiter at meals, and porter or errand-boy--by the custom of the
place and your own sense of propriety, you cannot but give something
or other in the shape of perquisites. I was told, on entering, that
half a guinea a quarter was the customary allowance,--the same sum, in
fact, as was levied by the college for his principal; but I gave mine a
guinea a quarter, thinking that little enough for the many services he
performed; and others, who were richer than myself, I dare say, often
gave much more. Yet, sometimes, it struck me, from the gratitude which
his looks testified, on my punctual payment of this guinea,--for it
was the only bill with regard to which I troubled myself to practise
any severe punctuality,--that perhaps some thoughtless young man
might give him less, or might even forget to give anything; and, at
all events, I have reason to believe that half that sum would have
contented him. These minutiæ I record purposely; my immediate object
being to give a rigorous statement of the real expenses incident to
an English university education, partly as a guide to the calculations
of parents, and partly as an answer to the somewhat libellous
exaggerations which are current on this subject, in times like these,
when even the truth itself, and received in a spirit of candour the
most indulgent, may be all too little to defend these venerable seats
of learning from the ruin which seems brooding over them. Yet, no!
Abominable is the language of despair even in a desperate situation.
And, therefore, Oxford, ancient mother! and thou, Cambridge, twin-light
of England! be vigilant and erect, for the enemy stands at all your
gates! Two centuries almost have passed since the boar was within
your vineyards, laying waste and desolating your heritage. Yet that
storm was not final, nor that eclipse total. May this also prove but
a trial and a shadow of affliction! which affliction, may it prove to
you, mighty incorporations, what, sometimes, it is to us, poor, frail
_homunculi_--a process of purification, a solemn and oracular warning!
And, when that cloud is overpast, then, rise, ancient powers, wiser and
better--ready, like the [Greek: lampadêphoroi] of old, to enter upon
a second _stadium_, and to transmit the sacred torch through a second
period of twice[7] five hundred years. So prays a loyal _alumnus_,
whose presumption, if any be, in taking upon himself a monitory tone,
is privileged by zeal and filial anxiety.

To return, however, into the track from which I have digressed. The
reader will understand that any student is at liberty to have private
servants of his own, as many and of what denomination he pleases.
This point, as many others of a merely personal bearing, when they
happen to stand in no relation to public discipline, neither the
University nor the particular college of the student feels summoned
or even authorized to deal with. Neither, in fact, does any other
University in Europe; and why, then, notice the case? Simply thus: if
the Oxford discipline, in this particular chapter, has nothing special
or peculiar about it, yet the case to which it applies _has_, and
is almost exclusively found in our Universities. On the Continent
it happens most rarely that a student has any funds disposable for
luxuries so eminently such as grooms or footmen; but at Oxford and
Cambridge the case occurs often enough to attract notice from the
least vigilant eye. And thus we find set down to the credit account of
other Universities the non-existence of luxury in this or other modes,
whilst, meantime, it is well known to the fair inquirer that each or
all are indulgences not at all or so much as in idea proscribed by
the sumptuary edicts of those Universities, but, simply, by the lower
scale of their general revenues. And this lower scale, it will be
said--how do you account for that? I answer, not so much by the general
inferiority of Continental Europe to Great Britain in _diffusive_
wealth (though that argument goes for something, it being notorious
that, whilst immoderate wealth, concentrated in a small number of
hands, exists in various continental states upon a larger scale than
with us, moderately large estates, on the other hand, are, with them,
as one to two hundred, or even two hundred and fifty, in comparison
with ours), but chiefly upon this fact, which is too much overlooked,
that the foreign Universities are not peopled from the wealthiest
classes, which are the classes either already noble, or wishing to
become such. And why is that? Purely from the vicious constitution of
society on the Continent, where all the fountains of honour lie in
the military profession or in the diplomatic. We English, haters and
revilers of ourselves beyond all precedent, disparagers of our own
eminent advantages beyond all sufferance of honour or good sense, and
daily playing into the hands of foreign enemies, who hate us out of
mere envy or shame, have amongst us some hundreds of writers who will
die or suffer martyrdom upon this proposition--that aristocracy, and
the spirit and prejudices of aristocracy, are more operative (more
effectually and more extensively operative) amongst ourselves than in
any other known society of men. Now, I, who believe all errors to arise
in some narrow, partial, or angular view of truth, am seldom disposed
to meet any sincere affirmation by a blank, unmodified denial. Knowing,
therefore, that some acute observers do really believe this doctrine as
to the aristocratic forces, and the way in which they mould English
society, I cannot but suppose that some symptoms do really exist of
such a phenomenon; and the only remark I shall here make on the case
is this, that, very often, where any force or influence reposes upon
deep realities, and upon undisturbed foundations, _there_ will be the
least heard of loquacious and noisy expressions of its power; which
expressions arise most, not where the current is most violent, but
where (being possibly the weakest) it is most fretted with resistance.

In England, the very reason why the aristocratic feeling makes
itself so sensibly felt and so distinctly an object of notice to the
censorious observer is, because it maintains a troubled existence
amongst counter and adverse influences, so many and so potent. This
might be illustrated abundantly. But, as respects the particular
question before me, it will be sufficient to say this: With us the
profession and exercise of knowledge, as a means of livelihood, is
honourable; on the Continent it is not so. The knowledge, for instance,
which is embodied in the three learned professions, does, with us, lead
to distinction and civil importance; no man can pretend to deny this;
nor, by consequence, that the Professors personally take rank with the
highest order of gentlemen. Are they not, I demand, everywhere with us
on the same footing, in point of rank and consideration, as those who
bear the king's commission in the army and navy? Can this be affirmed
of the Continent, either generally, or, indeed, partially? I say,
_no_. Let us take Germany as an illustration. Many towns (for anything
I know, all) present us with a regular bisection of the resident
_notables_, or wealthier class, into two distinct (often hostile)
coteries: one being composed of those who are "_noble_"; the other,
of families equally well educated and accomplished, but _not_, in the
continental sense, "noble." The meaning and value of the word is so
entirely misapprehended by the best English writers,--being, in fact,
derived from our own way of applying it,--that it becomes important to
ascertain its true value. A "nobility" which is numerous enough to fill
a separate ball-room in every sixth-rate town, it needs no argument to
show, cannot be a nobility in any English sense. In fact, an _edelmann_
or nobleman, in the German sense, is strictly what we mean by a _born
gentleman_; with this one only difference, that, whereas, with us, the
rank which denominates a man such passes off by shades so insensible,
and almost infinite, into the ranks below, that it becomes impossible
to assign it any strict demarkation or lines of separation, on the
contrary, the Continental noble points to certain fixed barriers, in
the shape of privileges, which divide him, _per saltum_, from those who
are below his own order. But, were it not for this one legal benefit
of accurate circumscription and slight favour, the Continental noble,
whether Baron of Germany, Count of France, or Prince of Sicily and
of Russia, is simply on a level with the common landed _esquire_ of
Britain, and _not_ on a level in very numerous cases. Such being the
case, how paramount must be the spirit of aristocracy in Continental
society! Our _haute noblesse_--our genuine nobility, who are such
in the general feeling of their compatriots--will do _that_ which
the phantom of nobility of the Continent will not: the spurious
nobles of Germany will not mix, on equal terms, with their untitled
fellow-citizens living in the same city and in the same style as
themselves; they will not meet them in the same ball or concert-room.
Our great territorial nobility, though sometimes forming exclusive
circles (but not, however, upon any principle of high birth), do
so daily. They mix as equal partakers in the same amusements of
races, balls, musical assemblies, with the baronets (or _élite_ of
the gentry); with the landed esquires (or middle gentry); with the
superior order of tradesmen (who, in Germany, are absolute ciphers, for
political weight, or social consideration, but, with us, constitute
the lower and broader stratum of the _nobilitas_,[8] or gentry). The
obscure baronage of Germany, it is undeniable, insist upon having
"an atmosphere of their own"; whilst the Howards, the Stanleys, the
Talbots, of England, the Hamiltons, the Douglases, the Gordons, of
Scotland, are content to acknowledge a sympathy with the liberal part
of their untitled countrymen, in that point which most searchingly
tries the principle of aristocratic pride, viz., in their pleasures.
To have the same pursuits of business with another may be a result of
accident or position; to have the same pleasures, being a matter of
choice, argues a community of nature in the _moral_ sensibilities, in
that part of our constitution which differences one man from another in
the capacities of greatness and elevation.

As with their amusements, so with their graver employments; the same
mutual repulsion continues to divide the two orders through life.
The nobles either live in gloomy seclusion upon their private funds,
wherever the privilege of primogeniture has enabled them to do so;
or, having no funds at all (the case of ninety-nine in one hundred),
they go into the army; that profession, the profession of arms, being
regarded as the only one compatible with an _edelmann's_ pretensions.
Such was once the feeling in England; such is still the feeling on the
Continent. It is a prejudice naturally clinging to a semi-barbarous
(because growing out of a barbarous) state, and, in its degree,
clinging to every stage of imperfect civilization; and, were there no
other argument, this would be a sufficient one, that England, under
free institutions, has outrun the Continent, in real civilization, by a
century; a fact which is concealed by the forms of luxurious refinement
in a few exclusive classes, too often usurping the name and honours of
radical civilization.

From the super-appreciation of the military profession arises a
corresponding contempt of all other professions whatsoever _paid by
fellow-citizens_, and not by the King or the State. The clerical
profession is in the most abject degradation throughout Southern
Germany; and the reason why this forces itself less imperiously upon
the public notice is, that, in rural situations, from the absence of a
resident gentry (speaking generally), the pastor is brought into rare
collision with those who style themselves _noble_; whilst, in towns,
the clergy find people enough to countenance those who, being in the
same circumstances as to comfort and liberal education, are also
under the same ban of rejection from the "nobility," or born gentry.
The legal profession is equally degraded; even a barrister or advocate
holds a place in the public esteem little differing from that of an
Old Bailey attorney of the worst class. And this result is the less
liable to modification from personal qualities, inasmuch as there is no
great theatre (as with us) for individual display. Forensic eloquence
is unknown in Germany, as it is too generally on the Continent, from
the defect of all popular or open judicatures. A similar defect of
deliberative assemblies--such, at least, as represent any popular
influences and debate with open doors--intercepts the very possibility
of senatorial eloquence.[9] That of the pulpit only remains. But even
of this--whether it be from want of the excitement and contagious
emulation from the other fields of oratory, or from the peculiar genius
of Lutheranism--no models have yet arisen that could, for one moment,
sustain a comparison with those of England or France. The highest names
in this department would not, to a foreign ear, carry with them any
of that significance or promise which surrounds the names of Jeremy
Taylor or Barrow, Bossuet or Bourdaloue, to those even who have no
personal acquaintance with their works. This absence of all fields for
gathering public distinctions co-operates, in a very powerful way,
with the contempt of the born gentry, to degrade these professions;
and this double agency is, a third time, reinforced by those political
arrangements which deny every form of state honour or conspicuous
promotion to the very highest description of excellence, whether of
the bar, the pulpit, or the civic council. Not "the fluent Murray,"
or the accomplished Erskine, from the English bar--not Pericles or
Demosthenes, from the fierce democracies of Greece--not Paul preaching
at Athens--could snatch a wreath from public homage, nor a distinction
from the state, nor found an influence, nor leave behind them an
operative model, in Germany, as now constituted. Other walks of
emolument are still more despised. Alfieri, a Continental "noble," that
is, a born gentleman, speaks of bankers as we in England should of a
Jewish usurer, or tricking money-changer. The liberal trades, such as
those which minister to literature or the fine arts, which, with us,
confer the station of gentleman upon those who exercise them, are, in
the estimate of a Continental "noble," fitted to assign a certain rank
or place in the train and equipage of a gentleman, but not to entitle
their most eminent professors to sit down, except by sufferance, in
his presence. And, upon this point, let not the reader derive his
notions from the German books: the vast majority of German authors are
not "noble"; and, of those who are, nine tenths are liberal in this
respect, and speak the language of liberality, not by sympathy with
their own order, or as representing _their_ feelings, but in virtue of
democratic or revolutionary politics.

Such as the rank is, and the public estimation of the leading
professions, such is the natural condition of the Universities which
rear them. The "nobles" going generally into the army, or leading lives
of indolence, the majority by far of those who resort to Universities
do so as a means of future livelihood. Few seek an academic life in
Germany who have either money to throw away on superfluities and
external show, or who have such a rank to support as might stimulate
their pride to expenses beyond their means. Parsimony is, therefore, in
these places, the governing law; and pleasure, not less fervently wooed
than at Oxford or at Cambridge, putting off her robes of elegance and
ceremony, descends to grossness, and not seldom to abject brutality.

The sum of my argument is--that, because, in comparison of the army, no
other civil profession is, in itself, held of sufficient dignity, and
not less, perhaps, because, under governments essentially unpopular,
none of these professions has been so dignified artificially by the
state, or so attached to any ulterior promotion, either through the
state or in the state, as to meet the demands of aristocratic pride,
none of them is cultivated as a means of distinction, but originally
as a means of livelihood; that the Universities, as the nurseries of
these unhonoured professions, share naturally in _their_ degradation,
and that, from this double depreciation of the place and its final
objects, few or none resort thither who can be supposed to bring
any extra funds for supporting a system of luxury; that the general
temperance, or sobriety of demeanour, is far enough, however, from
keeping pace with the absence of costly show; and that, for this
absence even, we are to thank their poverty rather than their will.
It is to the great honour, in my opinion, of our own country, that
those often resort to her fountains who have no motive but that of
disinterested reverence for knowledge; seeking, as all men perceive,
neither emolument directly from University funds, nor knowledge as the
means of emolument. Doubtless, it is neither dishonourable, nor, on
a large scale, possible to be otherwise, that students should pursue
their academic career chiefly as ministerial to their capital object of
a future livelihood. But still I contend that it is for the interest
of science and good letters that a considerable body of volunteers
should gather about their banners without pay or hopes of preferment.
This takes place on a larger scale at Oxford and Cambridge than
elsewhere; and it is but a trivial concession in return, on the part
of the University, that she should allow, even if she had the right
to withhold, the privilege of living within her walls as they would
have lived at their fathers' seats; with one only reserve, applied to
all modes of expense that are, in themselves, immoral excesses, or
occasions of scandal, or of a nature to interfere too much with the
natural hours of study, or specially fitted to tempt others of narrower
means to ruinous emulation.

Upon these principles, as it seems to me, the discipline of the
University is founded. The keeping of hunters, for example, is
unstatutable. Yet, on the other hand, it is felt to be inevitable that
young men of high spirit, familiar with this amusement, will find
means to pursue it in defiance of all the powers, however exerted,
that can properly be lodged in the hands of academic officers. The
range of the proctor's jurisdiction is limited by positive law; and
what should hinder a young man, bent upon his pleasure, from fixing
the station of his hunter a few miles out of Oxford, and riding to
cover on a hack, unamenable to any censure? For, surely, in this age,
no man could propose so absurd a thing as a general interdiction of
riding. How, in fact, does the University proceed? She discountenances
the practice; and, if forced upon her notice, she visits it with
censure, and that sort of punishment which lies within her means. But
she takes no pains to search out a trespass, which, by the mere act
of seeking to evade public display in the streets of the University,
already tends to limit itself; and which, besides, from its costliness,
can never become a prominent nuisance. This I mention as illustrating
the spirit of her legislation; and, even in this case, the reader
must carry along with him the peculiar distinction which I have
pressed with regard to English Universities, in the existence of a
large volunteer order of students seeking only the liberalization,
and not the profits, of academic life. In arguing upon their case,
it is not the fair logic to say, These pursuits taint the decorum of
the studious character; it is not fair to calculate how much is lost
to the man of letters by such addiction to fox-hunting, but, on the
contrary, what is gained to the fox-hunter, who would, at any rate, be
such, by so considerable a homage paid to letters, and so inevitable
a commerce with men of learning. Anything whatsoever attained in this
direction is probably so much more than would have been attained under
a system of less toleration. _Lucro ponamus_, we say, of the very least
success in such a case. But, in speaking of toleration as applied to
acts or habits positively against the statutes, I limit my meaning
to those which, in their own nature, are morally indifferent, and
are discountenanced simply as indirectly injurious, or as peculiarly
open to excess. Because, on graver offences (as gambling, &c.), the
malicious impeachers of Oxford must well have known that no toleration
whatsoever is practised or thought of. Once brought under the eye of
the University in a clear case and on clear evidence, it would be
punished in the most exemplary way open to a limited authority; by
_rustication_, at least--that is, banishment for a certain number
of terms, and consequent loss of these terms--supposing the utmost
palliation of circumstances; and, in an aggravated case, or on a second
offence, most certainly by final expulsion. But it is no part of duty
to serve the cause even of good morals by impure means; and it is as
difficult beforehand to prevent the existence of vicious practices so
long as men have, and ought to have, the means of seclusion liable to
no violation, as it is afterwards difficult, without breach of honour,
to obtain proof of their existence. Gambling has been known to exist
in some dissenting institutions; and, in my opinion, with no blame to
the presiding authorities. As to Oxford in particular, no such habit
was generally prevalent in my time; it is not an English vice; nor did
I ever hear of any great losses sustained in this way. But, were it
otherwise, I must hold, that, considering the numbers, rank, and great
opulence, of the students, such a habit would impeach the spirit and
temper of the age rather than the vigilance or magisterial fidelity
of the Oxford authorities. They are limited, like other magistrates,
by honour and circumstances, in a thousand ways; and if a knot of
students will choose to meet for purposes of gaming, they must always
have it in their power to baffle every honourable or becoming attempt
at detecting them. But upon this subject I shall make two statements,
which may have some effect in moderating the uncharitable judgments
upon Oxford discipline. The first respects the age of those who are
the objects of this discipline; on which point a very grave error
prevails. In the last Parliament, not once, but many times over, Lord
Brougham and others assumed that the students of Oxford were chiefly
_boys_; and this, not idly or casually, but pointedly, and with a
view to an ulterior argument; for instance, by way of proving how
little they were entitled to judge of those thirty-nine articles to
which their assent was demanded. Now, this argued a very extraordinary
ignorance; and the origin of the error showed the levity in which their
legislation was conducted. These noble lords had drawn their ideas of
a University exclusively from Glasgow. Here, it is well known, and I
mention it neither for praise nor blame, that students are in the habit
of coming at the early age of fourteen. These may allowably be styled
_boys_. But, with regard to Oxford, eighteen is about the _earliest_
age at which young men begin their residence: twenty and upwards is,
therefore, the age of the majority; that is, twenty is the _minimum_
of age for the vast majority, as there must always be more men of
three years' standing than of two or of one. Apply this fact to the
question of discipline: young men beyond twenty, generally,--that
is to say, of the age which qualifies men for seats in the national
council,--can hardly, with decency, either be called or treated as
boys; and many things become impossible as applied to _them_, which
might be of easy imposition upon an assemblage _really_ childish. In
mere justice, therefore, when speculating upon this whole subject of
Oxford discipline, the reader must carry along with him, at every
step, the recollection of that signal difference as to age which I
have now stated between Oxonians and those students whom the hostile
party contemplate in their arguments.[10] Meantime, to show that,
even under every obstacle presented by this difference of age, the
Oxford authorities do, nevertheless, administer their discipline with
fidelity, with intrepidity, and with indifference as respects the high
and the low, I shall select from a crowd of similar recollections two
anecdotes, which are but trifles in themselves, and yet are not such to
him who recognizes them as expressions of a uniform system of dealing.

A great Whig Lord (Earl C----) happened (it may be ten years ago) to
present himself one day at Trinity (the leading college of Cambridge),
for the purpose of introducing Lord F----ch, his son, as a future
member of that splendid society. Possibly it mortified his aristocratic
feelings to hear the head of the college, even whilst welcoming the
young nobleman in courteous terms, yet suggesting, with some solemnity,
that, before taking any final resolution in the matter, his lordship
would do well to consider whether he were fully prepared to submit
himself to college discipline; for that, otherwise, it became his
own duty frankly to declare that the college would not look upon his
accession to their society as any advantage. This language arose out
of some recent experience of refractory and turbulent conduct upon
the part of various young men of rank; but it is very possible that
the noble Earl, in his surprise at a salutation so uncourtly, might
regard it, in a Tory mouth, as having some lurking reference to his
own Whig politics. If so, he must have been still more surprised to
hear of another case, which would meet him before he left Cambridge,
and which involved some frank dealing as well as frank speaking, when
a privilege of exception might have been presumed, if Tory politics,
or services the most memorable, could ever create such a privilege.
The Duke of W---- had two sons at Oxford. The affair is now long past;
and it cannot injure either of them to say, that one of the brothers
trespassed against the college discipline, in some way which compelled
(or was thought to compel) the presiding authorities into a solemn
notice of his conduct. Expulsion appeared to be the appropriate penalty
of his offences: but, at this point, a just hesitation arose. Not in
any servile spirit, but under a proper feeling of consideration for
so eminent a public benefactor as this young nobleman's father. The
rulers paused--and at length signified to him that he was at liberty
to withdraw himself privately from the college, but also, and at the
same time, from the University. He did so, and his brother, conceiving
him to have been harshly treated, withdrew also; and both transferred
themselves to Cambridge. That could not be prevented: but there they
were received with marked reserve. One was _not_ received, I believe,
in a technical sense; and the other was received conditionally; and
such restrictions were imposed upon his future conduct as served most
amply, and in a case of great notoriety, to vindicate the claims of
discipline, and, in an extreme case, a case so eminently an extreme one
that none like it is ever likely to recur, to proclaim the footing upon
which the very highest rank is received at the English Universities.
Is that footing peculiar _to them_? I willingly believe that it is
not; and, with respect to Edinburgh and Glasgow, I am persuaded that
their weight of dignity is quite sufficient, and would be exerted to
secure the same subordination from men of rank, if circumstances should
ever bring as large a number of that class within their gates, and if
their discipline were equally applicable to the habits of students not
domiciled within their walls. But, as to the smaller institutions for
education within the pale of dissent, I feel warranted in asserting,
from the spirit of the anecdotes which have reached me, that they have
not the _auctoritas_ requisite for adequately maintaining their dignity.

So much for the aristocracy of our English Universities: their glory
is, and the happiest application of their vast influence, that they
have the power to be republican, as respects their internal condition.
Literature, by substituting a different standard of rank, tends to
republican equality; and, as one instance of this, properly belonging
to the chapter of _servants_, which originally led to this discussion,
it ought to be known that the class of "servitors," once a large
body in Oxford, have gradually become practically extinct under the
growing liberality of the age. They carried in their academic dress a
mark of their inferiority; they waited at dinner on those of higher
rank, and performed other menial services, humiliating to themselves,
and latterly felt as no less humiliating to the general name and
interests of learning. The better taste, or rather the relaxing
pressure of aristocratic prejudice, arising from the vast diffusion
of trade and the higher branches of mechanic art, have gradually
caused these functions of the order (even where the law would not
permit the extinction of the order) to become obsolete. In my time,
I was acquainted with two servitors: but one of them was rapidly
pushed forward into a higher station; and the other complained of no
degradation, beyond the grievous one of exposing himself to the notice
of young women in the streets with an untasselled cap; but this he
contrived to evade, by generally going abroad without his academic
dress. The _servitors_ of Oxford are the _sizars_ of Cambridge; and I
believe the same changes[11] have taken place in both.

One only account with the college remains to be noticed; but this is
the main one. It is expressed in the bills by the word _battels_,
derived from the old monkish word _patella_ (or batella), a plate;
and it comprehends whatsoever is furnished for dinner and for supper,
including malt liquor, but not wine, as well as the materials for
breakfast, or for any casual refreshment to country visitors, excepting
only groceries. These, together with coals and faggots, candles,
wine, fruit, and other more trifling _extras_, which are matters of
personal choice, form so many private accounts against your name, and
are usually furnished by tradesmen living near to the college, and
sending their servants daily to receive orders. Supper, as a meal
not universally taken, in many colleges is served privately in the
student's own room; though some colleges still retain the ancient
custom of a public supper. But dinner is, in all colleges, a public
meal, taken in the refectory or "hall" of the society; which, with the
chapel and library, compose the essential public _suite_ belonging to
every college alike. No absence is allowed, except to the sick, or to
those who have formally applied for permission to give a dinner-party.
A fine is imposed on all other cases of absence. Wine is not generally
allowed in the public hall, except to the "high table," that is,
the table at which the fellows and some other privileged persons are
entitled to dine. The head of the college rarely dines in public.
The other tables, and, after dinner, the high table, usually adjourn
to their wine, either upon invitations to private parties, or to
what are called the "common rooms" of the several orders--graduates
and undergraduates, &c. The dinners are always plain, and without
pretensions--those, I mean, in the public hall; indeed, nothing _can_
be plainer in most colleges--a simple choice between two or three sorts
of animal food, and the common vegetables. No fish, even as a regular
part of the fare; no soups, no game; nor, except on some very rare
festivity, did I ever see a variation from this plain fare at Oxford.
This, indeed, is proved sufficiently by the average amount of the
_battels_. Many men "battel" at the rate of a guinea a week: I did so
for years: that is, at the rate of three shillings a day for everything
connected with meals, excepting only tea, sugar, milk, and wine. It is
true that wealthier men, more expensive men, and more careless men,
often "battelled" much higher; but, if they persisted in this excess,
they incurred censures, more and more urgent, from the head of the
college.

Now, let us sum up; promising that the extreme duration of residence
in any college at Oxford amounts to something under thirty weeks. It
is possible to keep "short terms," as the phrase is, by a residence of
thirteen weeks, or ninety-one days; but, as this abridged residence is
not allowed, except in here and there a college, I shall assume--as
something beyond the strict _maximum_ of residence--thirty weeks as my
basis. The account will then stand thus:

This will be a liberal calculation for the college bill. What remains?
1. Candles, which the reader will best calculate upon the standard
of his own general usage in this particular. 2. Coals, which are
remarkably dear at Oxford--dearer, perhaps, than anywhere else in
the island; say, three times as dear as at Edinburgh. 3. Groceries.
4. Wine. 5. Washing. This last article was, in my time, regulated by
the college, as there were certain privileged washerwomen, between
whom and the students it was but fair that some proper authority
should interfere to prevent extortion, in return for the monopoly
granted. Six guineas was the regulated sum; but this paid for
everything,--table-linen, &c., as well as for wearing apparel; and
it was understood to cover the whole twenty-eight or thirty weeks.
However, it was open to every man to make his own arrangements,
by insisting on a separate charge for each separate article. All
other expenses of a merely personal nature, such as postage, public
amusements, books, clothes, &c., as they have no special connection
with Oxford, but would, probably, be balanced by corresponding, if
not the very same, expenses in any other place or situation, I do not
calculate. What I have specified are the expenses which would accrue
to a student in consequence of leaving his father's house. The rest
would, in these days, be the same, perhaps, everywhere. How much, then,
shall we assume as the total charge on account of Oxford? Candles,
considering the quantity of long days amongst the thirty weeks, may
be had for one shilling and sixpence a week; for few students--unless
they have lived in India, after which a physical change occurs in the
sensibility of the nostrils--are finical enough to burn wax-lights.
This will amount to two pounds five shillings. Coals, say sixpence a
day; for three-pence a day will amply feed one grate in Edinburgh; and
there are many weeks in the thirty which will demand no fire at all.
Groceries and wine, which are all that remain, I cannot calculate. But
suppose we allow for the first a shilling a day, which will be exactly
ten guineas for thirty weeks; and for the second, nothing at all. Then
the extras, in addition to the college bills, will stand thus:

The college bills, therefore, will be £66: 9s.; the extras, not
furnished by the college, will be about £24: 6s.,--making a total
amount of £90: 15s. And for this sum, annually, a man may defray
_every_ expense incident to an Oxford life, through a period of weeks
(viz., thirty) something more than he will be permitted to reside. It
is true, that, for the _first_ year, there will be, in addition to
this, his outfit: and for _every_ year there will be his journeys.
There will also be twenty-two weeks uncovered by this estimate; but for
these it is not my business to provide, who deal only with Oxford.

That this estimate is true, I know too feelingly. Would that it were
_not_! would that it were false! Were it so, I might the better justify
to myself that commerce with fraudulent Jews which led me so early
to commence the dilapidation of my small fortune. It _is_ true; and
true for a period (1804-8) far dearer than this. And to any man who
questions its accuracy I address this particular request--that he will
lay his hand upon the special item which he disputes. I anticipate that
he will answer thus: "I dispute none: it is not by positive things
that your estimate errs, but by negations. It is the absence of all
allowance for indispensable items that vitiates the calculation." Very
well: but to this, as to other things, we may apply the words of Dr.
Johnson--"Sir, the reason I drink no wine, is because I can practise
abstinence, but not temperance." Yes: in all things, abstinence is
easier than temperance; for a little enjoyment has invariably the
effect of awaking the sense of enjoyment, irritating it, and setting
it on edge. I, therefore, recollecting my own case, have allowed for
_no_ wine-parties. Let our friend, the abstraction we are speaking
of, give breakfast-parties, if he chooses to give any; and certainly
to give none at all, unless he were dedicated to study, would seem
very churlish. Nobody can be less a friend than myself to monkish and
ascetic seclusion, unless it were for twenty-three hours out of the
twenty-four.

But, however this be settled, let no mistake be made; nor let that be
charged against the system which is due to the habits of individuals.
Early in the last century, Dr. Newton, the head of a college in Oxford,
wrote a large book against the Oxford system, as ruinously expensive.
But then, as now, the real expense was due to no cause over which the
colleges could exercise any effectual control. It is due exclusively to
the habits of social intercourse amongst the young men; from which _he_
may abstain who chooses. But, for any academic authorities to interfere
by sumptuary laws with the private expenditure of grown men, many of
them, in a legal sense, _of age_, and all near it, must appear romantic
and extravagant, for this (or, indeed, any) stage of society. A tutor
being required, about 1810, to fix the amount of allowance for a young
man of small fortune, nearly related to myself, pronounced three
hundred and twenty pounds little enough. He had this allowance, and was
ruined in consequence of the credit which it procured for him, and the
society it connected him with. The majority have two hundred pounds a
year: but my estimate stands good, for all that.

Having stated, generally, the expenses of the Oxford system, I am
bound, in candour, to mention one variety in the mode of carrying
this system into effect, open to every man's adoption, which confers
certain privileges, but, at the same time (by what exact mode, I know
not), considerably increases the cost, and in that degree disturbs
my calculation. The great body of undergraduates, or students, are
divided into two classes--_Commoners_, and _Gentlemen Commoners_.
Perhaps nineteen out of twenty belong to the former class; and it is
for that class, as having been my own, that I have made my estimate.
The other class of _Gentlemen Commoners_ (who, at Cambridge, bear
the name of _Fellow Commoners_) wear a peculiar dress, and have some
privileges which naturally imply some corresponding increase of cost;
but why this increase should go to the extent of doubling the total
expense, as it is generally thought to do, or how it _can_ go to
that extent, I am unable to explain. The differences which attach
to the rank of "Gentlemen Commoners" are these: At his entrance he
pays double "caution money"; that is, whilst Commoners in general
pay about twenty-five guineas, he pays fifty; but this can occur
only once; and, besides, in strict point of right, this sum is only
a deposit, and is liable to be withdrawn on leaving the University,
though it is commonly enough finally presented to the college in the
shape of plate. The next difference is, that, by comparison with the
Commoner, he wears a much more costly dress. The Commoner's gown is
made of what is called _prince's stuff_, and, together with the cap,
costs about five guineas. But the Gentleman Commoner has two gowns--an
undress for the morning, and a full dress-gown for the evening; both
are made of silk, and the latter is very elaborately ornamented. The
cap also is more costly, being covered with velvet instead of cloth.
At Cambridge, again, the tassel is made of gold fringe or bullion,
which, in Oxford, is peculiar to the caps of noblemen; and there
are many other varieties in that University, where the dress for
"pensioners" (that is, the Oxford "Commoners") is specially varied in
almost every college; the object being, perhaps, to give a ready means
to the academic officers for ascertaining, at a glance, not merely the
general fact that such or such a delinquent is a gownsman (which is all
that can be ascertained at Oxford), but also the particular college
to which he belongs. Allowance being made for these two items of
"dress" and "caution-money," both of which apply only to the original
outfit, I know of no others in which the expenditure of a Gentleman
Commoner ought to exceed, or could with propriety exceed, that of a
Commoner. He has, indeed, a privilege as regards the choice of rooms;
he chooses first, and probably chooses those rooms which, being best,
are dearest; that is, they are on a level with the best; but usually
there are many sets almost equally good; and of these the majority
will be occupied by Commoners. So far, there is little opening for
a difference. More often, again, it will happen that a man of this
aristocratic class keeps a private servant; yet this happens also to
Commoners, and is, besides, no properly college expense. Tutorage is
charged double to a Gentleman Commoner--namely, twenty guineas a year:
this is done upon a fiction (as it sometimes turns out) of separate
attention, or aid given in a private way to his scholastic pursuits.
Finally, there arises naturally another and peculiar source of expense
to the "Gentleman Commoner," from a fact implied in his Cambridge
designation of "_Fellow_ Commoner," _commensalis_--viz., that he
associates at meals with the "fellows" and other authorities of the
college. Yet this again expresses rather the particular shape which
his expenditure assumes than any absolute increase in its amount. He
subscribes to a regular mess, and pays, therefore, whether present or
not; but so, in a partial sense, does the Commoner, by his forfeits
for "absent commons." He subscribes also to a regular fund for wine;
and, therefore, he does not enjoy that immunity from wine-drinking
which is open to the Commoner. Yet, again, as the Commoner does but
rarely avail himself of this immunity, as he drinks no less wine than
the Gentleman Commoner, and, generally speaking, wine not worse in
quality, it is difficult to see any ground for a regular assumption
of higher expenditure in the one class than the other. However, the
universal impression favours that assumption. All people believe that
the rank of Gentleman Commoner imposes an expensive burden, though
few people ever ask why. As a matter of fact, I believe it to be true
that Gentlemen Commoners spend more by a third, or a half, than any
equal number of Commoners, taken without selection. And the reason is
obvious: those who become Gentlemen Commoners are usually determined
to that course by the accident of having very large funds; they are
eldest sons, or only sons, or men already in possession of estates, or
else (which is as common a case as all the rest put together) they are
the heirs of newly-acquired wealth--sons of the _nouveaux riches_--a
class which often requires a generation or two to rub off the insolence
of a too conscious superiority. I have called them an "aristocratic"
class; but, in strictness, they are not such; they form a privileged
class, indeed, but their privileges are few and trifling, not to add
that these very privileges are connected with one or two burdens, more
than outweighing them in the estimate of many; and, upon the whole, the
chief distinction they enjoy is that of advertising themselves to the
public as men of great wealth, or great expectations, and, therefore,
as subjects peculiarly adapted to fraudulent attempts. Accordingly, it
is not found that the sons of the nobility are much inclined to enter
this order: these, if they happen to be the eldest sons of earls,
or of any peers above the rank of viscount, so as to enjoy a title
themselves by the courtesy of England, have special privileges in both
Universities as to length of residence, degrees, &c.; and their rank
is ascertained by a special dress. These privileges it is not usual to
forgo; though sometimes that happens, as, in my time, in the instance
of Lord George Grenville (now Lord Nugent); he neither entered at the
aristocratic college (Christ Church), nor wore the dress of a nobleman.
Generally, however, an elder son appears in his true character of
nobleman; but the younger sons rarely enter the class of Gentlemen
Commoners. They enter either as "Commoners," or under some of those
various designations ("_scholars_," "_demies_," "_students_," "_junior
fellows_") which imply that they stand upon the foundation of the
college to which they belong, and are aspirants for academic emoluments.

Upon the whole, I am disposed to regard this order of Gentlemen
Commoners as a standing temptation held out by authority to expensive
habits, and a very unbecoming proclamation of honour paid to the
aristocracy of wealth. And I know that many thoughtful men regard
it in the same light with myself, and regret deeply that any such
distribution of ranks should be authorized, as a stain upon the
simplicity and general manliness of the English academic laws. It is
an open profession of homage and indulgence to wealth, _as_ wealth--to
wealth disconnected from everything that might ally it to the ancestral
honours and heraldries of the land. It is also an invitation, or rather
a challenge, to profuse expenditure. Regularly, and by law, a Gentleman
Commoner is liable to little heavier burdens than a Commoner; but, to
meet the expectations of those around him, and to act up to the part
he has assumed, he must spend more, and he must be more careless in
controlling his expenditure, than a moderate and prudent Commoner. In
every light, therefore, I condemn the institution, and give it up to
the censures of the judicious. So much in candour I concede. But, to
show equal candour on the other side, it must be remembered that this
institution descends to us from ancient times, when wealth was not so
often divided from territorial or civic honours, conferring a real
precedency.

There was one reason why I sought solitude at that early age, and
sought it in a morbid excess, which must naturally have conferred
upon my character some degree of that interest which belongs to all
extremes. My eye had been couched into a secondary power of vision,
by misery, by solitude, by sympathy with life in all its modes, by
experience too early won, and by the sense of danger critically
escaped. Suppose the case of a man suspended by some colossal arm over
an unfathomed abyss,--suspended, but finally and slowly withdrawn,--it
is probable that he would not smile for years. That was my case: for
I have not mentioned in the "Opium Confessions" a thousandth part of
the sufferings I underwent in London and in Wales; partly because
the misery was too monotonous, and, in that respect, unfitted for
description; but still more because there is a mysterious sensibility
connected with real suffering, which recoils from circumstantial
rehearsal or delineation, as from violation offered to something
sacred, and which is, or should be, dedicated to privacy. Grief does
not parade its pangs, nor the anguish of despairing hunger willingly
count again its groans or its humiliations. Hence it was that Ledyard,
the traveller, speaking of his Russian experiences, used to say that
some of his miseries were such that he never _would_ reveal them.
Besides all which, I really was not at liberty to speak, without many
reserves, on this chapter of my life, at a period (1821) not twenty
years removed from the actual occurrences, unless I desired to court
the risk of crossing at every step the existing law of libel, so full
of snares and man-traps, to the careless equally with the conscientious
writer. This is a consideration which some of my critics have lost
sight of in a degree which surprises me. One, for example, puts it to
his readers whether any house such as I describe as the abode of my
money-lending friend could exist "_in_ Oxford-street"; and, at the
same time, he states, as circumstances drawn from my description, but,
in fact, pure coinages of his own, certain romantic impossibilities,
which, doubtless, could as little attach to a house in Oxford-street
as they could to a house in any other quarter of London. Meantime, I
had sufficiently indicated that, whatsoever street _was_ concerned in
that affair, Oxford-street was _not_: and it is remarkable enough, as
illustrating this amiable reviewer's veracity, that no one street in
London was absolutely excluded _but_ one, and that one, Oxford-street.
For I happened to mention that, on such a day (my birth-day), I had
turned aside _from_ Oxford-street to look at the house in question. I
will now add that this house was in Greek-street: so much it may be
safe to say. But every candid reader will see that both prudential
restraints, and also disinterested regard to the feelings of possibly
amiable descendants from a vicious man, would operate with any
thoughtful writer, in such a case, to impose reserve upon his pen.
Had my guardians, had my money-lending friend of Jewry, and others
concerned in my memoirs, been so many shadows, bodiless abstractions,
and without earthly connections, I might readily have given my own
names to my own creations, and have treated them as unceremoniously as
I pleased. Not so under the real circumstances of the case. My chief
guardian, for instance, though obstinate to a degree which risked the
happiness and the life of his ward, was an upright man otherwise; and
his children are entitled to value his memory. Again, my Greek-street
[Greek: trapezitês], the "_foenerator Alpheus_," who delighted to
reap where he had not sown, and too often (I fear) allowed himself in
practices which not impossibly have long since been found to qualify
him for distant climates and "Botanic" regions,--even he, though I
might truly describe him as a mere highwayman whenever he happened
to be aware that I had received a friendly loan, yet, like other
highwaymen of repute, and "gentle thieves," was not inexorable to the
petitions of his victim: he would sometimes toss back what was required
for some instant necessity of the road; and at _his_ breakfast-table
it was, after all, as elsewhere recorded, that I contrived to support
life; barely, indeed, and most slenderly, but still with the final
result of escaping absolute starvation. With that recollection before
me, I could not allow myself to probe his frailties too severely,
had it even been certainly safe to do so. But enough; the reader
will understand that a year spent either in the valleys of Wales,
or upon the streets of London, by a wanderer too often houseless
in both situations, might naturally have peopled the mind of one
constitutionally disposed to solemn contemplations with memorials of
human sorrow and strife too profound to pass away for years.

Thus, then, it was. Past experience of a very peculiar kind, the
agitations of many lives crowded into the compass of a year or two, in
combination with a peculiar structure of mind, offered one explanation
of the very remarkable and unsocial habits which I adopted at college;
but there was another not less powerful, and not less unusual. In
stating this, I shall seem, to some persons, covertly designing an
affront to Oxford. But that is far from my intention. It is noways
peculiar to Oxford, but will, doubtless, be found in every University
throughout the world, that the younger part of the members--the
undergraduates, I mean, generally, whose chief business must have
lain amongst the great writers of Greece and Rome--cannot have found
leisure to cultivate extensively their own domestic literature.
Not so much that time will have been wanting; but that the whole
energy of the mind, and the main course of the subsidiary studies
and researches, will naturally have been directed to those difficult
languages amongst which lie their daily tasks. I make it no subject
of complaint or scorn, therefore, but simply state it as a fact, that
few or none of the Oxford undergraduates, with whom parity of standing
threw me into collision at my first outset, knew anything at all of
English Literature. The _Spectator_ seemed to me the only English
book of a classical rank which they had read; and even this less for
its inimitable delicacy, humour, and refined pleasantry in dealing
with manners and characters, than for its insipid and meagre essays,
ethical or critical. This was no fault of theirs: they had been sent
to the book chiefly as a subject for Latin translations, or of other
exercises; and, in such a view, the vague generalities of superficial
morality were more useful and more manageable than sketches of manner
or character, steeped in national peculiarities. To translate the
terms of Whig politics into classical Latin would be as difficult as
it might be for a Whig himself to give a consistent account of those
politics from the year 1688. Natural, however, and excusable, as this
ignorance might be, to myself it was intolerable and incomprehensible.
Already, at fifteen, I had made myself familiar with the great English
poets. About sixteen, or not long after, my interest in the story
of Chatterton had carried me over the whole ground of the Rowley
controversy; and that controversy, by a necessary consequence, had so
familiarised me with the "Black Letter" that I had begun to find an
unaffected pleasure in the ancient English metrical romances; and in
Chaucer, though acquainted as yet only with part of his works, I had
perceived and had felt profoundly those divine qualities which, even
at this day, are so languidly acknowledged by his unjust countrymen.
With this knowledge, and this enthusiastic knowledge of the elder
poets--of those most remote from easy access--I could not well be a
stranger in other walks of our literature, more on a level with the
general taste, and nearer to modern diction, and, therefore, more
extensively multiplied by the press. Yet, after all--as one proof how
much more commanding is that part of a literature which speaks to the
elementary affections of men than that which is founded on the mutable
aspects of manners--it is a fact that, even in our elaborate system
of society, where an undue value is unavoidably given to the whole
science of social intercourse, and a continual irritation applied to
the sensibilities which point in that direction, still, under all these
advantages, Pope himself is less read, less quoted, less thought of,
than the elder and graver section of our literature. It is a great
calamity for an author such as Pope, that, generally speaking, it
requires so much experience of life to enjoy his peculiar felicities
as must argue an age likely to have impaired the general capacity for
enjoyment. For my part, I had myself a very slender acquaintance with
this chapter of our literature; and what little I had was generally,
at that period of my life, as with most men it continues to be to
the end of life, a reflex knowledge, acquired through those pleasant
miscellanies, half gossip, half criticism--such as Warton's _Essay on
Pope_, Boswell's _Johnson_, Mathias's _Pursuits of Literature_, and
many scores besides of the same indeterminate class: a class, however,
which do a real service to literature, by diffusing an indirect
knowledge of fine writers in their most effective passages, where
else, in a direct shape, it would often never extend.

In some parts, then, having even a profound knowledge of our
literature, in all parts having some, I felt it to be impossible that I
should familiarly associate with those who had none at all; not so much
as a mere historical knowledge of the literature in its capital names
and their chronological succession. Do I mention this in disparagement
of Oxford? By no means. Among the undergraduates of higher standing,
and occasionally, perhaps, of my own, I have since learned that many
might have been found eminently accomplished in this particular. But
seniors do not seek after juniors; they must be sought; and, with my
previous bias to solitude, a bias equally composed of impulses and
motives, I had no disposition to take trouble in seeking any man for
any purpose.

But, on this subject, a fact still remains to be told, of which I
am justly proud; and it will serve, beyond anything else that I can
say, to measure the degree of my intellectual development. On coming
to Oxford, I had taken up one position in advance of my age by full
thirty years: that appreciation of Wordsworth, which it has taken full
thirty years to establish amongst the public, I had already made, and
had made operative to my own intellectual culture, in the same year
when I clandestinely quitted school. Already, in 1802, I had addressed
a letter of fervent admiration to Mr. Wordsworth. I did not send it
until the spring of 1803; and, from misdirection, it did not come into
his hands for some months. But I had an answer from Mr. Wordsworth
before I was eighteen; and that my letter was thought to express the
homage of an enlightened admirer may be inferred from the fact that his
answer was long and full. On this anecdote I do not mean to dwell; but
I cannot allow the reader to overlook the circumstances of the case.
At this day [1835] it is true, no journal can be taken up which does
not habitually speak of Mr. Wordsworth as of _a_ great, if not _the_
great, poet of the age. Mr. Bulwer, living in the intensest pressure of
the world, and though recoiling continually from the judgments of the
world, yet never in any violent degree ascribes to Mr. Wordsworth (in
his _England and the English_, p. 308) "an influence of a more noble
and purely intellectual character than _any_ writer of our age or
nation has exercised." Such is the opinion held of this great poet in
1835; but what were those of 1805-15,--nay, of 1825? For twenty years
after the date of that letter to Mr. Wordsworth above referred to,
language was exhausted, ingenuity was put on the rack, in the search
after images and expressions vile enough, insolent enough, to convey
the unutterable contempt avowed for all that he had written by the
fashionable critics. One critic--who still, I believe, edits a rather
popular journal, and who belongs to that class, feeble, fluttering,
ingenious, who make it their highest ambition not to lead, but, with
a slave's adulation, to obey and to follow all the caprices of the
public mind--described Mr. Wordsworth as resembling, in the quality
of his mind, an old nurse babbling in her paralytic dotage to sucking
babies. If this insult was peculiarly felt by Mr. Wordsworth, it was on
a consideration of the unusual imbecility of him who offered it, and
not because in itself it was baser or more insolent than the language
held by the majority of journalists who then echoed the public voice.
_Blackwood's Magazine_ (1817) first accustomed the public ear to the
language of admiration coupled with the name of Wordsworth. This began
with Professor Wilson; and well I remember--nay, the proofs are still
easy to hunt up--that, for eight or ten years, this singularity of
opinion, having no countenance from other journals, was treated as a
whim, a paradox, a bold extravagance, of the _Blackwood_ critics. Mr.
Wordsworth's neighbours in Westmoreland, who had (generally speaking) a
profound contempt for him, used to rebut the testimony of _Blackwood_
by one constant reply--"Ay, _Blackwood_ praises Wordsworth, but who
else praises him?" In short, up to 1820, the name of Wordsworth was
trampled under foot; from 1820 to 1830, it was militant; from 1830 to
1835, it has been triumphant. In 1803, when I entered at Oxford, that
name was absolutely unknown; and the finger of scorn, pointed at it in
1802 by the first or second number of the _Edinburgh Review_, failed to
reach its mark from absolute defect of knowledge in the public mind.
Some fifty besides myself knew who was meant by "that poet who had
cautioned his friend against growing double," etc.; to all others it
was a profound secret.

These things must be known and understood properly to value the
prophetic eye and the intrepidity of two persons, like Professor Wilson
and myself, who, in 1802-3, attached themselves to a banner not yet
raised and planted; who outran, in fact, their contemporaries by one
entire generation, and did _that_ about 1802 which the rest of the
world are doing in chorus about 1832.

Professor Wilson's period at Oxford exactly coincided with my own; yet,
in that large world, we never met. I know, therefore, but little of his
policy in regard to such opinions or feelings as tended to dissociate
him from the mass of his coëvals. This only I know, that he lived as
it were in public, and must, therefore, I presume, have practised a
studied reserve as to his deepest admirations; and, perhaps, at that
day (1803-8) the occasions would be rare in which much dissimulation
would be needed. Until Lord Byron had begun to pilfer from Wordsworth
and to abuse him, allusions to Wordsworth were not frequent in
conversations; and it was chiefly on occasions of some question
arising about poetry in general, or about the poets of the day, that
it became difficult to dissemble. For my part, hating the necessity
for dissimulation as much as the dissimulation itself, I drew from
this peculiarity also of my own mind a fresh reinforcement of my other
motives for sequestering myself; and, for the first two years of my
residence in Oxford, I compute that I did not utter one hundred words.

I remember distinctly the first (which happened also to be the last)
conversation that I ever held with my tutor. It consisted of three
sentences, two of which fell to his share, one to mine. On a fine
morning, he met me in the Quadrangle, and, having then no guess of the
nature of my pretensions, he determined (I suppose) to probe them.
Accordingly, he asked me, "What I had been lately reading?" Now, the
fact was that I, at that time immersed in metaphysics, had really been
reading and studying very closely the _Parmenides_, of which obscure
work some Oxford man, early in the last century, published a separate
edition. Yet, so profound was the benignity of my nature that, in
those days, I could not bear to witness, far less to cause, the least
pain or mortification to any human being. I recoiled, indeed, from
the society of most men, but not with any feelings of dislike. On the
contrary, in order that I _might_ like all men, I wished to associate
with none. Now, then, to have mentioned the _Parmenides_ to one who,
fifty thousand to one, was a perfect stranger to its whole drift and
purpose, looked too _méchant_, too like a trick of malice, in an age
when such reading was so very unusual. I felt that it would be taken
for an express stratagem for stopping my tutor's mouth. All this
passing rapidly through my mind, I replied, without hesitation, that I
had been reading Paley. My tutor's rejoinder I have never forgotten:
"Ah! an excellent author; excellent for his matter; only you must be
on your guard as to his style; he is very vicious _there_." Such was
the colloquy; we bowed, parted, and never more (I apprehend) exchanged
one word. Now, trivial and trite as this comment on Paley may appear
to the reader, it struck me forcibly that more falsehood, or more
absolute falsehood, or more direct inversion of the truth, could
not, by any artifice or ingenuity, have been crowded into one short
sentence. Paley, as a philosopher, is a jest, the disgrace of the age;
and, as regards the two Universities, and the enormous responsibility
they undertake for the books which they sanction by their official
examinations for degrees, the name of Paley is their great opprobrium.
But, on the other hand, for style, Paley is a master. Homely, racy,
vernacular English, the rustic vigour of a style which intentionally
forgoes the graces of polish on the one hand, and of scholastic
precision on the other--that quality of merit has never been attained
in a degree so eminent. This first interchange of thought upon a
topic of literature did not tend to slacken my previous disposition
to retreat into solitude; a solitude, however, which at no time was
tainted with either the moroseness or the pride of a cynic.

Neither must the reader suppose that, even in that day, I belonged
to the party who disparage the classical writers, or the classical
training of the great English schools. The Greek drama I loved and
revered. But, to deal frankly, because it is a subject which I shall
hereafter bring before the public, I made great distinctions. I was
not that indiscriminate admirer of Greek and Roman literature which
those too generally are who admire it at all. This protesting spirit
against a false and blind idolatry was with me, at that time, a matter
of enthusiasm--almost of bigotry. I was a bigot against bigots. Let
us take the Greek oratory, for example:--What section of the Greek
literature is more fanatically exalted, and studiously in depreciation
of our own? Let us judge of the sincerity at the base of these hollow
affectations, by the downright facts and the producible records.
To admire, in any sense which can give weight and value to your
admiration, pre-supposes, I presume, some acquaintance with its object.
As the earliest title to an opinion, one way or other, of the Greek
eloquence, we ought to have studied some of its most distinguished
artists; or, say _one_, at least; and this one, we may be sure, will
be, as it ought to be, Demosthenes. Now, it is a fact, that all the
copies of Demosthenes sold within the last hundred years would not
meet the demand of one considerable town, were that orator a subject
of study amongst even classical scholars. I doubt whether, at this
day, there exist twenty men in Europe who can be said to have even
once read Demosthenes; and, therefore, it was that, when Mr. Mitford,
in his "History of Greece," took a new view of this orator's political
administration--a view which lowered his character for integrity--he
found an unresisting acceder to his doctrines in a public having no
previous opinion upon the subject, and, therefore, open to any casual
impression of malice or rash judgment. Had there been any acquaintance
with the large remains which we still possess of this famous orator,
no such wrong could have been done. I, from my childhood, had been a
reader, nay, a student, of Demosthenes; and simply for this reason,
that, having meditated profoundly on the true laws and philosophy
of diction, and of what is vaguely denominated style, and finding
nothing of any value in modern writers upon this subject, and not much
as regards the grounds and ultimate principles even in the ancient
rhetoricians, I have been reduced to collect my opinions from the great
artists and practitioners, rather than from the theorists; and, among
those artists, in the most plastic of languages, I hold Demosthenes to
have been the greatest.

The Greek is, beyond comparison, the most plastic of languages. It
was a material which bent to the purposes of him who used it beyond
the material of other languages; it was an instrument for a larger
compass of modulations; and it happens that the peculiar theme of
an orator imposes the very largest which is consistent with a prose
diction. One step further in passion, and the orator would become a
poet. An orator can exhaust the capacities of a language--an historian,
never. Moreover, the age of Demosthenes was, in my judgment, the age
of highest development for arts dependent upon social refinement.
That generation had fixed and ascertained the use of words; whereas
the previous generation of Thucydides, Xenophon, Plato, &c., was a
transitional period: the language was still moving, and tending to
a meridian not yet attained; and the public eye had been directed
consciously upon language, as in and for itself an organ of
intellectual delight, for too short a time to have mastered the whole
art of managing its resources. All these were reasons for studying
Demosthenes, as the one great model and standard of Attic prose; and
studied him I _had_, more than any other prose writer whatever. _Pari
passu_, I had become sensible that others had _not_ studied him. One
monotonous song of applause I found raised on every side; something
about being "like a torrent, that carries everything before it." This
original image is all we get in the shape of criticism, and never any
attempt even at illustrating what is greatest in him, or characterising
what is most peculiar. The same persons who discovered that Lord
Brougham was the modern Bacon have also complimented him with the title
of the English Demosthenes. Upon this hint, Lord Brougham, in his
address to the Glasgow students, has deluged the great Athenian with
wordy admiration. There is an obvious prudence in lodging your praise
upon an object from which you count upon a rebound to yourself. But
here, as everywhere else, you look in vain for any marks or indications
of a personal and _direct_ acquaintance with the original orations.
The praise is built rather upon the popular idea of Demosthenes than
upon the real Demosthenes. And not only so, but even upon style itself,
and upon the art of composition _in abstracto_, Lord Brougham does not
seem to have formed any clear conceptions,--principles he has none.
Now, it is useless to judge of an artist until you have some principles
on the art. The two capital secrets in the art of prose composition
are these: 1st, The philosophy of transition and connection, or the
art by which one step in an evolution of thought is made to arise
out of another: all fluent and effective composition depends on the
_connections_;--2dly, The way in which sentences are made to modify
each other; for the most powerful effects in written eloquence arise
out of this reverberation, as it were, from each other in a rapid
succession of sentences; and, because some limitation is necessary
to the length and complexity of sentences, in order to make this
interdependency felt: hence it is that the Germans have no eloquence.
The construction of German prose tends to such immoderate length of
sentences that no effect of intermodification can ever be apparent.
Each sentence, stuffed with innumerable clauses of restriction, and
other parenthetical circumstances, becomes a separate section--an
independent whole. But, without insisting on Lord Brougham's
oversights, or errors of defect, I will digress a moment to one
positive caution of his, which will measure the value of his philosophy
on this subject. He lays it down for a rule of indefinite application
that the Saxon part of our English idiom is to be favoured at the
expense of that part which has so happily coalesced with the language
from the Latin or Greek. This fancy, often patronized by other writers,
and even acted upon, resembles that restraint which some metrical
writers have imposed upon themselves--of writing a long copy of verses
from which some particular letter, or from each line of which some
different letter, should be carefully excluded. What followed? Was the
reader sensible, in the practical effect upon his ear, of any beauty
attained? By no means; all the difference, sensibly perceived, lay in
the occasional constraints and affectations to which the writer had
been driven by his self-imposed necessities. The same chimera exists
in Germany; and so much further is it carried that one great puritan
in this heresy (Wolf) has published a vast dictionary, the rival of
Adelung's, for the purpose of expelling every word of foreign origin
and composition out of the language, by assigning some equivalent term
spun out from pure native Teutonic materials. _Bayonet_, for example,
is patriotically rejected, because a word may be readily compounded
tantamount to _musket-dirk_; and this sort of composition thrives
showily in the German, as a language running into composition with
a fusibility only surpassed by the Greek. But what good purpose is
attained by such caprices? In three sentences the sum of the philosophy
may be stated. It has been computed (see _Duclos_) that the Italian
opera has not above six hundred words in its whole vocabulary: so
narrow is the range of its emotions, and so little are these emotions
disposed to expand themselves into any variety of thinking. The same
remark applies to that class of simple, household, homely passion,
which belongs to the early ballad poetry. Their passion is of a quality
more venerable, it is true, and deeper than that of the opera, because
more permanent and coextensive with human life; but it is not much
wider in its sphere, nor more apt to coalesce with contemplative or
philosophic thinking. Pass from these narrow fields of the intellect,
where the relations of the objects are so few and simple, and the
whole prospect so bounded, to the immeasurable and sea-like arena
upon which Shakspeare careers--co-infinite with life itself--yes, and
with something more than life. Here is the other pole, the opposite
extreme. And what is the choice of diction? What is the _lexis_? Is
it Saxon exclusively, or is it Saxon by preference? So far from that,
the Latinity is intense--not, indeed, in his construction, but in his
choice of words; and so continually are these Latin words used with a
critical respect to their earliest (and, where _that_ happens to have
existed, to their unfigurative) meaning, that, upon this one argument I
would rely for upsetting the else impregnable thesis of Dr. Farmer as
to Shakspeare's learning. Nay, I will affirm that, out of this regard
to the Latin acceptation of Latin words, may be absolutely explained
the Shakspearian meaning of certain words which has hitherto baffled
all his critics. For instance, the word _modern_, of which Dr. Johnson
professes himself unable to explain the _rationale_ or principle
regulating its Shakspearian use, though he felt its value, it is to
be deduced thus: First of all, change the pronunciation a little, by
substituting for the short o, as we pronounce it in _modern_, the long
_o_, as heard in _modish_, and you will then, perhaps, perceive the
process of analogy by which it passed into the Shakspearian use. The
_matter_ or substance of a thing is, usually, so much more important
than its fashion or _manner_, that we have hence adopted, as one way
for expressing what is important as opposed to what is trivial, the
word _material_. Now, by parity of reason, we are entitled to invert
this order, and to express what is unimportant by some word indicating
the mere fashion or external manner of an object as opposed to its
substance. This is effected by the word _modal_ or _m[=o]dern_, as
the adjective from _modus_, a fashion or manner; and in that sense
Shakspeare employs the word. Thus, Cleopatra, undervaluing to Cæsar's
agent the bijouterie which she has kept back from inventory, and which
her treacherous steward had betrayed, describes them as mere trifles--

     "Such gifts as we greet modern friends withal";

where all commentators have _felt_ that modern must from the position
mean slight and inconsiderable, though perplexed to say how it came
by such a meaning. A _modern_ friend is, in the Shakspearian sense,
with relation to a real and serviceable friend, that which the fashion
of a thing is by comparison with its substance. But a still better
illustration may be taken from a common line, quoted every day, and
ludicrously misinterpreted. In the famous picture of life--"All the
world's a stage"--the justice of the peace is described as

     "Full of wise saws and modern instances";

which (_horrendum dictu!_) has been explained, and, I verily believe,
is generally understood to mean, _full of wise sayings and modern
illustrations_. The true meaning is--full of proverbial maxims of
conduct and of trivial arguments; that is, of petty distinctions, or
verbal disputes, such as never touch the point at issue. The word
_modern_ I have already deduced; the word _instances_ is equally Latin,
and equally used by Shakspeare in its Latin sense. It is originally
the word _instantia_, which, by the monkish and scholastic writers,
is uniformly used in the sense of an argument, and originally of an
argument urged in objection to some previous argument.

I affirm, therefore, that Lord Brougham's counsel to the Glasgow
students is not only bad counsel,--and bad counsel for the result, as
well as for the grounds, which are either capricious or nugatory,--but
also that, in the exact proportion in which the range of thought
expands, it is an impossible counsel, an impracticable counsel--a
counsel having for its purpose to embarrass and lay the mind in
fetters, where even its utmost freedom and its largest resources will
be found all too little for the growing necessities of the intellect.
"Long-tailed words in _osity_ and _ation_!" What does _that_ describe?
Exactly the Latin part of our language. Now, those very terminations
speak for themselves:--All high abstractions end in _ation_; that
is, they are Latin; and, just in proportion as the abstracting power
extends and widens, do the circles of thought widen, and the horizon or
boundary (contradicting its own Grecian name) melts into the infinite.
On this account it was that Coleridge (_Biographia Literaria_) remarks
on Wordsworth's philosophical poetry, that, in proportion as it goes
into the profound of passion and of thought, do the words increase
which are vulgarly called "_dictionary_ words." Now, these words,
these "dictionary" words, what are they? Simply words of Latin or
Greek origin: no other words, no Saxon words, are ever called by
illiterate persons dictionary words. And these dictionary words are
indispensable to a writer, not only in the proportion by which he
transcends other writers as to extent and as to subtlety of thinking,
but also as to elevation and sublimity. Milton was not an extensive
or discursive thinker, as Shakspeare was; for the motions of his mind
were slow, solemn, sequacious, like those of the planets; not agile
and assimilative; not attracting all things within its own sphere; not
multiform: repulsion was the law of his intellect--he moved in solitary
grandeur. Yet, merely from this quality of grandeur, unapproachable
grandeur, his intellect demanded a larger infusion of Latinity into his
diction. For the same reason (and without such aids he would have had
no proper element in which to move his wings) he enriched his diction
with Hellenisms and with Hebraisms[14]; but never, as could be easy to
show, without a full justification in the result. Two things may be
asserted of all his exotic idioms--1st, That they express what could
not have been expressed by any native idiom; 2d, That they harmonize
with the English language, and give a colouring of the antique, but not
any sense of strangeness, to the diction. Thus, in the double negative,
"Nor did they not perceive," &c., which is classed as a Hebraism--if
any man fancy that it expresses no more than the simple affirmative,
he shows that he does not understand its force; and, at the same time,
it is a form of thought so natural and universal that I have heard
English people, under corresponding circumstances, spontaneously
fall into it. In short, whether a man differ from others by greater
profundity or by greater sublimity, and whether he write as a poet
or as a philosopher, in any case, he feels, in due proportion to the
necessities of his intellect, an increasing dependence upon the Latin
section of the English language; and the true reason why Lord Brougham
failed to perceive this, or found the Saxon equal to his wants, is one
which I shall not scruple to assign, inasmuch as it does not reflect
personally on Lord Brougham, or, at least, on him exclusively, but
on the whole body to which he belongs. That thing which he and they
call by the pompous name of statesmanship, but which is, in fact,
_statescraft_--the art of political intrigue--deals (like the opera)
with ideas so few in number, and so little adapted to associate
themselves with other ideas, that, possibly, in the one case equally
as in the other, six hundred words are sufficient to meet all their
demands.

I have used my privilege of discursiveness to step aside from
Demosthenes to another subject, no otherwise connected with the
Attic orator than, first, by the common reference of both subjects
to rhetoric; but, secondly, by the accident of having been jointly
discussed by Lord Brougham in a paper which (though now forgotten)
obtained, at the moment, most undue celebrity. For it is one of the
infirmities of the public mind with us, that whatever is said or done
by a public man,--any opinion given by a member of Parliament, however
much out of his own proper jurisdiction and range of inquiry,--commands
an attention not conceded even to those who speak under the known
privilege of professional knowledge. Thus, Cowper was not discovered
to be a poet worthy of any general notice until Charles Fox, a most
slender critic, had vouchsafed to quote a few lines, and that not so
much with a view to the poetry as to its party application. But now,
returning to Demosthenes, I affirm that his case is the case of nearly
all the classical writers,--at least, of all the prose writers. It is,
I admit, an extreme one; that is, it is the general case in a more
intense degree. Raised almost to divine honours, never mentioned but
with affected rapture, the classics of Greece and Rome are seldom read,
most of them never; are they, indeed, the closet companions of any man?
Surely it is time that these follies were at an end; that our practice
were made to square a little better with our professions, and that our
pleasures were sincerely drawn from those sources in which we pretend
that they lie.

The Greek language, mastered in any eminent degree, is the very rarest
of all accomplishments, and precisely because it is unspeakably the
most difficult. Let not the reader dupe himself by popular cant. To
be an accomplished Grecian demands a very peculiar quality of talent;
and it is almost inevitable that one who is such should be vain of a
distinction which represents so much labour and difficulty overcome.
For myself, having, as a school-boy, attained to a very unusual mastery
over this language, and (though as yet little familiar with the
elaborate science of Greek metre) moving through all the obstacles and
resistances of a Greek book with the same celerity and ease as through
those of the French and Latin, I had, in vanquishing the difficulties
of the language, lost the main stimulus to its cultivation. Still, I
read Greek daily; but any slight vanity which I might connect with a
power so rarely attained, and which, under ordinary circumstances, so
readily transmutes itself into a disproportionate admiration of the
author, in me was absolutely swallowed up in the tremendous hold taken
of my entire sensibilities at this time by our own literature. With
what fury would I often exclaim: He who loveth not his brother whom he
hath seen, how shall he love God whom he hath not seen? You, Mr. A, L,
M, O, you who care not for Milton, and value not the dark sublimities
which rest ultimately (as we all feel) upon dread realities, how
can you seriously thrill in sympathy with the spurious and fanciful
sublimities of the classical poetry--with the nod of the Olympian
Jove, or the seven-league strides of Neptune? Flying Childers had the
most prodigious stride of any horse on record; and at Newmarket that
is justly held to be a great merit; but it is hardly a qualification
for a Pantheon. The parting of Hector and Andromache--that is tender,
doubtless; but how many passages of far deeper, far diviner tenderness,
are to be found in Chaucer! Yet in these cases we give our antagonist
the benefit of an appeal to what is really best and most effective in
the ancient literature. For, if we should go to Pindar, and some other
great names, what a revelation of hypocrisy as respects the _fade_
enthusiasts for the Greek poetry!

Still, in the Greek tragedy, however otherwise embittered against
ancient literature by the dismal affectations current in the scenical
poetry, at least I felt the presence of a great and original power.
It might be a power inferior, upon the whole, to that which presides
in the English tragedy; I believed that it was; but it was equal and
appealed equally to real and deep sensibilities in our nature. Yet,
also, I felt that the two powers at work in the two forms of the
drama were essentially different; and, without having read a line of
German at that time, or knowing of any such controversy, I began to
meditate on the elementary grounds of difference between the Pagan
and the Christian forms of poetry. The dispute has since been carried
on extensively in France, not less than in Germany, as between the
_classical_ and the _romantic_. But I will venture to assert that not
one step in advance has been made, up to this day. The shape into which
I threw the question it may be well to state; because I am persuaded
that out of that one idea, properly pursued, might be evolved the whole
separate characteristics of the Christian and the Antique. Why is it,
I asked, that the Christian idea of _sin_ is an idea utterly unknown
to the Pagan mind? The Greeks and Romans had a clear conception of a
moral ideal, as we have; but this they estimated by a reference to the
will; and they called it virtue, and the antithesis they called vice.
The _lacheté_ or relaxed energy of the will, by which it yielded to
the seductions of sensual pleasure, that was vice; and the braced-up
tone by which it resisted these seductions was virtue. But the idea
of holiness, and the antithetic idea of sin, as a violation of this
awful and unimaginable sanctity, was so utterly undeveloped in the
Pagan mind, that no word exists in classical Greek or classical Latin
which approaches either pole of this synthesis; neither the idea of
_holiness_, nor of its correlate, _sin_, could be so expressed in Latin
as at once to satisfy Cicero and a scientific Christian. Again (but
this was some years after), I found Schiller and Goethe applauding
the better taste of the ancients, in symbolizing the idea of death by
a beautiful youth, with a torch inverted, &c., as compared with the
Christian types of a skeleton and hourglasses, &c. And much surprised
I was to hear Mr. Coleridge approving of this German sentiment. Yet,
here again, I felt, the peculiar genius of Christianity was covertly
at work moving upon a different road, and under opposite ideas, to a
just result, in which the harsh and austere expression yet pointed to
a dark reality, whilst the beautiful Greek adumbration was, in fact,
a veil and a disguise. The corruptions and the other "dishonours" of
the grave, and whatsoever composes the sting of death in the Christian
view, is traced up to sin as its ultimate cause. Hence, besides the
expression of Christian humility, in thus nakedly exhibiting the wrecks
and ruins made by sin, there is also a latent profession indicated
of Christian hope. For the Christian contemplates steadfastly, though
with trembling awe, the lowest point of his descent; since, for him,
that point, the last of his fall, is also the first of his re-ascent,
and serves, besides, as an exponent of its infinity; the infinite
depth becoming, in the rebound, a measure of the infinite re-ascent.
Whereas, on the contrary, with the gloomy uncertainties of a Pagan
on the question of his final restoration, and also (which must not
be overlooked) with his utter perplexity as to the nature of his
restoration, if any were by accident in reserve, whether in a condition
tending downwards or upwards, it was the natural resource to consult
the general feeling of anxiety and distrust, by throwing a thick
curtain and a veil of beauty over the whole too painful subject. To
place the horrors in high relief could here have answered no purpose
but that of wanton cruelty; whereas, with the Christian hopes, the
very saddest memorials of the havocks made by death are antagonist
prefigurations of great victories in the rear.

These speculations, at that time, I pursued earnestly; and I then
believed myself, as I yet do, to have ascertained the two great and
opposite laws under which the Grecian and the English tragedy has each
separately developed itself. Whether wrong or right in that belief,
sure I am that those in Germany who have treated the case of Classical
and Romantic are not entitled to credit for any discovery at all. The
Schlegels, who were the hollowest of men, the windiest and wordiest (at
least, Frederick was so), pointed to the distinction; barely indicated
it; and that was already some service done, because a presumption
arose that the antique and the modern literatures, having clearly some
essential differences, might, perhaps, rest on foundations originally
distinct, and obey different laws. And hence it occurred that many
disputes, as about the unities, &c., might originate in a confusion
of these laws. This checks the presumption of the shallow criticism,
and points to deeper investigations. Beyond this, neither the German
nor the French disputers on the subject have talked to any profitable
purpose.

I have mentioned Paley as accidentally connected with my _début_ in
literary conversation; and I have taken occasion to say how much I
admired his style and its unstudied graces, how profoundly I despised
his philosophy. I shall here say a word or two more on that subject. As
respects his style, though secretly despising the opinion avowed by my
tutor (which was, however, a natural opinion for a stiff lover of the
artificial and the pompous), I would just as unwillingly be supposed
to adopt the extravagant opinions, in the other extreme, of Dr. Parr
and Mr. Coleridge. These two gentlemen, who privately hated Paley,
and, perhaps, traduced him, have hung like bees over one particular
paragraph in his Evidences, as though it were a flower transplanted
from Hymettus. Dr. Parr pronounced it the finest sentence in the
English language. It is a period (that is, a cluster of sentences)
moderately well, but not _too_ well, constructed, as the German
nurses are accustomed to say. Its felicity depends on a trick easily
imitated--on a balance happily placed (namely, "_in which the wisest
of mankind would rejoice to find an answer to their doubts and rest to
their inquiries_)." As a _bravura_, or _tour de force_, in the dazzling
fence of rhetoric, it is surpassed by many hundreds of passages which
might be produced from rhetoricians; or, to confine myself to Paley's
contemporaries, it is very far surpassed by a particular passage in
Burke's letter upon the Duke of Bedford's base attack upon him in
the House of Lords; which passage I shall elsewhere produce, because
I happen to know, on the authority of Burke's executors, that Burke
himself considered it the finest period which he had ever written.
At present, I will only make one remark, viz. that it is always
injudicious, in the highest degree, to cite for admiration that which
is not a _representative_ specimen of the author's manner. In reading
Lucian, I once stumbled on a passage of German pathos, and of German
effect. Would it have been wise, or would it have been intellectually
just, to quote this as the text of an eulogium on Lucian? What
false criticism it would have suggested to every reader! what false
anticipations! To quote a formal and periodic pile of sentences was to
give the feeling that Paley was what the regular rhetorical artists
designate as a periodic writer, when, in fact, no one conceivable
character of style more pointedly contradicted the true description of
his merits.

But, leaving the style of Paley, I must confess that I agree with Mr.
Bulwer (_England and the English_) in thinking it shocking and almost
damnatory to an English University, the great well-heads of creeds,
moral and evangelical, that authors such in respect of doctrine as
Paley and Locke should hold that high and influential station as
teachers, or rather oracles of truth, which has been conceded to them.
As to Locke, I, when a boy, had made a discovery of one blunder full
of laughter and of fun, which, had it been published and explained
in Locke's lifetime, would have tainted his whole philosophy with
suspicion. It relates to the Aristotelian doctrine of syllogism,
which Locke undertook to ridicule. Now, a flaw, a hideous flaw, in
the _soi-disant_ detecter of flaws, a ridicule in the exposer of the
ridiculous--_that_ is fatal; and I am surprised that Lee, who wrote a
folio against Locke in his lifetime, and other examiners, should have
failed in detecting this. I shall expose it elsewhere; and, perhaps,
one or two other exposures of the same kind will give an impetus to
the descent of this falling philosophy. With respect to Paley, and
the naked _prudentialism_ of his system, it is true that in a longish
note Paley disclaims that consequence. But to this we may reply, with
Cicero, _Non quæro quid neget Epicurus, sed quid congruenter neget_.
Meantime, waiving all this as too notorious, and too frequently
denounced, I wish to recur to this trite subject, by way of stating
an objection made to the Paleyan morality in my seventeenth year, and
which I have never since seen reason to withdraw. It is this:--I affirm
that the whole work, from first to last, proceeds upon that sort of
error which the logicians call _ignoratio elenchi_, that is, ignorance
of the very question concerned--of the point at issue. For, mark, in
the very vestibule of ethics, two questions arise--two different and
disconnected questions, A and B; and Paley has answered the wrong one.
Thinking that he was answering A, and meaning to answer A, he has,
in fact, answered B. One question arises thus: Justice is a virtue;
temperance is a virtue; and so forth. Now, what is the common principle
which ranks these several species under the same genus? What, in the
language of logicians, is the common differential principle which
determines these various aspects of moral obligation to a common
genus? Another question, and a more interesting question to men in
general, is this,--What is the motive to virtue? By what impulse, law,
or motive, am I impelled to be virtuous rather than vicious? Whence
is the motive derived which should impel me to one line of conduct in
preference to the other? This, which is a practical question, and,
therefore, more interesting than the other, which is a pure question
of speculation, was that which Paley believed himself to be answering.
And his answer was,--that utility, a perception of the resulting
benefit, was the true determining motive. Meantime, it was objected
that often the most obvious results from a virtuous action were far
otherwise than beneficial. Upon which, Paley, in the long note referred
to above, distinguished thus: that, whereas actions have many results,
some proximate, some remote, just as a stone thrown into the water
produces many concentric circles, be it known that he, Dr. Paley, in
what he says of utility, contemplates only the final result, the very
outermost circle; inasmuch as he acknowledges a possibility that the
first, second, third, including the penultimate circle, may all happen
to clash with utility; but then, says he, the outermost circle of all
will never fail to coincide with the absolute maximum of utility.
Hence, in the first place, it appears that you cannot apply this test
of utility in a practical sense; you cannot say, This is useful,
_ergo_, it is virtuous; but, in the inverse order, you must say, This
is virtuous, _ergo_, it is useful. You do not rely on its usefulness
to satisfy yourself of its being virtuous; but, on the contrary, you
rely on its virtuousness, previously ascertained, in order to satisfy
yourself of its usefulness. And thus the whole practical value of this
test disappears, though in that view it was first introduced; and a
vicious circle arises in the argument; as you must have ascertained
the virtuousness of an act, in order to apply the test of its being
virtuous. But, _secondly_, it now comes out that Paley was answering a
very different question from that which he supposed himself answering.
Not any practical question as to the motive or impelling force in
being virtuous, rather than vicious,--that is, to the _sanctions_
of virtue,--but a purely speculative question, as to the essence of
virtue, or the common _vinculum_ amongst the several modes or species
of virtue (justice, temperance, &c.)--this was the real question
which he was answering. I have often remarked that the largest and
most subtle source of error in philosophic speculations has been the
confounding of the two great principles so much insisted on by the
Leibnitzians, viz., the _ratio cognoscendi_ and the _ratio essendi_.
Paley believed himself to be assigning--it was his full purpose to
assign--the _ratio cognoscendi_; but, instead of that, unconsciously
and surreptitiously, he has actually assigned the _ratio essendi_, and,
after all, a false and imaginary _ratio essendi_.

Using a New Testament, of which (in the narrative parts at least)
any one word being given will suggest most of what is immediately
consecutive, you evade the most irksome of the penalties annexed to the
first breaking ground in a new language: you evade the necessity of
hunting up and down a dictionary. Your own memory, and the inevitable
suggestions of the context, furnish a dictionary _pro hac vice_. And
afterwards, upon advancing to other books, where you are obliged to
forgo such aids, and to swim without corks, you find yourself already
in possession of the particles for expressing addition, succession,
exception, inference--in short, of all the forms by which transition
or connexion is effected (_if_, _but_, _and_, _therefore_, _however_,
_notwithstanding_), together with all those adverbs for modifying
or restraining the extent of a subject or a predicate, which in all
languages alike compose the essential frame-work or _extra-linear_
machinery of human thought. The filling-up--the _matter_ (in a
scholastic sense)--may differ infinitely; but the _form_, the
periphery, the determining moulds into which this matter is fused--all
this is the same for ever: and so wonderfully limited in its extent is
this frame-work, so narrow and rapidly revolving is the clock-work of
connexions among human thoughts, that a dozen pages of almost any book
suffice to exhaust all the [Greek: epea pteroenta][16] which express
them. To have mastered these [Greek: epea pteroenta] is in effect to
have mastered seven-tenths, at the least, of any language; and the
benefit of using a New Testament, or the familiar parts of an Old
Testament, in this preliminary drill, is, that your own memory is thus
made to operate as a perpetual dictionary or nomenclator. I have heard
Mr. Southey say that, by carrying in his pocket a Dutch, Swedish, or
other Testament, on occasion of a long journey performed in "_muggy_"
weather, and in the inside of some venerable "old heavy"--such as used
to bestow their tediousness upon our respectable fathers some thirty
or forty years ago--he had more than once turned to so valuable an
account the doziness or the dulness of his fellow-travellers, that,
whereas he had "booked" himself at the coach-office utterly [Greek:
analphabêtos], unacquainted with the first rudiments of the given
language, he had made his parting bows to his coach brethren (secretly
returning thanks to them for their stupidity) in a condition for
grappling with any common book in that dialect. One of the polyglot Old
or New Testaments published by Bagster would be a perfect Encyclopædia,
or _Panorganon_, for such a scheme of coach discipline, upon dull roads
and in dull company. As respects the German language in particular, I
shall give one caution from my own experience to the self-instructor:
it is a caution which applies to the German language exclusively, or
to that more than to any other, because the embarrassment which it
is meant to meet grows out of a defect of taste characteristic of
the German mind. It is this: elsewhere, you would naturally, as a
beginner, resort to _prose_ authors, since the license and audacity of
poetic thinking, and the large freedom of a poetic treatment, cannot
fail to superadd difficulties of individual creation to the general
difficulties of a strange dialect. But this rule, good for every
other case, is _not_ good for the literature of Germany. Difficulties
there certainly are, and perhaps in more than the usual proportion,
from the German peculiarities of poetic treatment; but even these are
overbalanced in the result by the single advantage of being limited
in the extent by the metre, or (as it may happen) by the particular
stanza. To German poetry there is a known, fixed, calculable limit.
Infinity, absolute infinity, is impracticable in any German metre. Not
so with German prose. Style, in any sense, is an inconceivable idea
to a German intellect. Take the word in the limited sense of what the
Greeks called [Greek: Synthesis onomatôn]--_i.e._, the construction
of sentences--I affirm that a German (unless it were here and there a
Lessing) cannot admit such an idea. Books there are in German, and,
in other respects, very good books too, which consist of one or two
enormous sentences. A German sentence describes an arch between the
rising and the setting sun. Take Kant for illustration: he has actually
been complimented by the cloud-spinner, Frederick Schlegel, who is now
in Hades, as a most original artist in the matter of style. "Original"
Heaven knows he was! His idea of a sentence was as follows:--We have
all seen, or read of, an old family coach, and the process of packing
it for a journey to London some seventy or eighty years ago. Night and
day, for a week at least, sate the housekeeper, the lady's maid, the
butler, the gentleman's gentlemen, &c., packing the huge ark in all
its recesses, its "imperials," its "wells," its "Salisbury boots,"
its "sword-cases," its front pockets, side pockets, rear pockets, its
"hammer-cloth cellars" (which a lady explains to me as a corruption
from _hamper-cloth_, as originally a cloth for hiding a hamper, stored
with _viaticum_), until all the uses and needs of man, and of human
life, savage or civilized, were met with separate provision by the
infinite chaos. Pretty nearly upon the model of such an old family
coach packing did Kant institute and pursue the packing and stuffing of
one of his regular sentences. Everything that could ever be needed in
the way of explanation, illustration, restraint, inference, by-clause,
or indirect comment, was to be crammed, according to this German
philosopher's taste, into the front pockets, side pockets, or rear
pockets, of the one original sentence. Hence it is that a sentence will
last in reading whilst a man

     "Might reap an acre of his neighbour's corn."

Nor is this any peculiarity of Kant's. It is common to the whole family
of prose-writers of Germany, unless when they happen to have studied
French models, who cultivate the opposite extreme. As a caution,
therefore, practically applied to this particular anomaly in German
prose-writing, I advise all beginners to choose between two classes
of composition--ballad poetry, or comedy--as their earliest school
of exercise: ballad poetry, because the form of the stanza (usually
a quatrain) prescribes a very narrow range to the sentences; comedy,
because the form of dialogue, and the imitation of daily life in its
ordinary tone of conversation, and the spirit of comedy, naturally
suggesting a brisk interchange of speech, all tend to short sentences.
These rules I soon drew from my own experience and observation. And
the one sole purpose towards which I either sought or wished for aid
respected the pronunciation; not so much for attaining a just one
(which I was satisfied could not be realized out of Germany, or, at
least, out of a daily intercourse with Germans) as for preventing
the formation, unawares, of a radically false one. The guttural and
palatine sounds of the _ch_, and some other German peculiarities,
cannot be acquired without constant practice. But the false Westphalian
or Jewish pronunciation of the vowels, diphthongs, &c., may easily
be forestalled, though the true delicacy of Meissen should happen to
be missed. Thus much guidance I purchased, with a very few guineas,
from my young Dresden tutor, who was most anxious for permission to
extend his assistance; but this I would not hear of: and, in the spirit
of fierce (perhaps foolish) independence, which governed most of my
actions at that time of life, I did all the rest for myself.

     "It was a banner broad unfurl'd,
     The picture of that western world."

These, or words like these, in which Wordsworth conveys the sudden
apocalypse, as by an apparition, to an ardent and sympathising
spirit, of the stupendous world of America, rising, at once, like an
exhalation, with all its shadowy forests, its endless savannas, and
its pomp of solitary waters--well and truly might I have applied to my
first launching upon that vast billowy ocean of the German literature.
As a past literature, as a literature of inheritance and tradition, the
German was nothing. Ancestral titles it had none; or none comparable to
those of England, Spain, or even Italy; and there, also, it resembled
America, as contrasted with the ancient world of Asia, Europe, and
North Africa.[17] But, if its inheritance were nothing, its prospects,
and the scale of its present development, were in the amplest style of
American grandeur. _Ten thousand_ new books, we are assured by Menzel,
an author of high reputation--a _literal myriad_--is considerably below
the number annually poured from all quarters of Germany into the vast
reservoir of Leipsic: spawn infinite, no doubt, of crazy dotage, of
dreaming imbecility, of wickedness, of frenzy, through every phasis of
Babylonian confusion; yet, also, teeming and heaving with life and the
instincts of truth--of truth hunting and chasing in the broad daylight,
or of truth groping in the chambers of darkness; sometimes seen as it
displays its cornucopia of tropical fruitage; sometimes heard dimly,
and in promise, working its way through diamond mines. Not the tropics,
not the ocean, not life itself, is such a type of variety, of infinite
forms, or of creative power, as the German literature in its recent
motions (say for the last twenty years), gathering, like the Danube, a
fresh volume of power at every stage of its advance. A banner it was,
indeed, to me of miraculous promise, and suddenly unfurled. It seemed,
in those days, an El Dorado as true and undeceiving as it was evidently
inexhaustible. And the central object in this interminable wilderness
of what then seemed imperishable bloom and verdure--the very tree of
knowledge in the midst of this Eden--was the new or transcendental
philosophy of Immanuel Kant.

I have described the gorgeousness of my expectations in those early
days of my prelusive acquaintance with German literature. I have a
little lingered in painting that glad aurora of my first pilgrimage to
the fountains of the Rhine and of the Danube, in order adequately to
shadow out the gloom and blight which soon afterwards settled upon the
hopes of that golden dawn. In Kant, I had been taught to believe, were
the keys of a new and a creative philosophy. Either "_ejus ductu_," or
"_ejus auspiciis_"--that is, either directly under his guidance, or
indirectly under any influence remotely derived from his principles--I
looked confidingly to see the great vistas and avenues of truth laid
open to the philosophic inquirer. Alas! all was a dream. Six weeks'
study was sufficient to close my hopes in that quarter for ever. The
philosophy of Kant--so famous, so commanding in Germany from about
the period of the French Revolution--already, in 1805, I had found to
be a philosophy of destruction, and scarcely in any one chapter so
much as _tending_ to a philosophy of reconstruction. It destroys by
wholesale, and it substitutes nothing. Perhaps, in the whole history of
man, it is an unexampled case that such a scheme of speculation--which
offers nothing seducing to human aspirations, nothing splendid to the
human imagination, nothing even positive and affirmative to the human
understanding--should have been able to found an interest so broad and
deep among thirty-five millions of cultivated men. The English reader
who supposes this interest to have been confined to academic bowers,
or the halls of philosophic societies, is most inadequately alive to
the case. Sects, heresies, schisms, by hundreds, have arisen out of
this philosophy; many thousands of books have been written by way of
teaching it, discussing it, extending it, opposing it. And yet it is a
fact that all its doctrines are negative--teaching, in no case, what
we _are_, but simply what we are _not_, to believe--and that all its
truths are barren. Such being its unpopular character, I cannot but
imagine that the German people have received it with so much ardour
from profound incomprehension of its meaning, and utter blindness to
its drift: a solution which may seem extravagant, but is not so; for,
even amongst those who have expressly commented on this philosophy,
not one of the many hundreds whom I have myself read but has retracted
from every attempt to explain its dark places. In these dark places
lies, indeed, the secret of its attraction. Were light poured into
them, it would be seen that they are _culs-de-sac_, passages that
lead to nothing; but, so long as they continue dark, it is not known
whither they lead, how far, in what direction, and whether, in fact,
they may not issue into paths connected directly with the positive
and the infinite. Were it known that upon every path a barrier faces
you insurmountable to human steps--like the barriers which fence in
the Abyssinian valley of Rasselas--the popularity of this philosophy
would expire at once; for no popular interest can long be sustained
by speculations which, in every aspect, are known to be essentially
negative and essentially finite. Man's nature has something of infinity
within itself, which requires a corresponding infinity in its objects.
We are told, indeed, by Mr. Bulwer, that the Kantian system has ceased
to be of any authority in Germany--that it is defunct, in fact--and
that we have first begun to import it into England after its root
had withered, or begun to wither, in its native soil. But Mr. Bulwer
is mistaken. The philosophy has never withered in Germany. It cannot
even be said that its fortunes have retrograded: they have oscillated:
accidents of taste and ability in particular professors, or caprices of
fashion, have given a momentary fluctuation to this or that new form
of Kantianism--an ascendency, for a period, to various, and, in some
respects, conflicting modifications of the transcendental system; but
all alike have derived their power mediately from Kant. No weapons,
even if employed as hostile weapons, are now forged in any armoury but
that of Kant; and, to repeat a Roman figure which I used above, all
the modern polemic tactics of what is called metaphysics are trained
and made to move either _ejus ductu_ or _ejus auspiciis_. Not one of
the new systems affects to call back the Leibnitzian philosophy, the
Cartesian, or any other of earlier or later date, as adequate to the
purposes of the intellect in this day, or as capable of yielding
even a sufficient terminology. Let this last fact decide the question
of Kant's vitality. _Qui bene distinguit bene docet._ This is an old
adage. Now, he who imposes new names upon all the acts, the functions,
and the objects of the philosophic understanding must be presumed
to have distinguished most sharply, and to have ascertained with
most precision, their general relations--_so long as his terminology
continues to be adopted_. This test, applied to Kant, will show that
his spirit yet survives in Germany. Frederick Schlegel, it is true,
twenty years ago, in his lectures upon Literature, assures us that
even the disciples of the great philosopher have agreed to abandon his
philosophic nomenclature. But the German philosophic literature, since
that date, tells another tale. Mr. Bulwer is, therefore, wrong; and,
without going to Germany, looking only to France, he will see cause to
revise his sentence. Cousin--the philosophic Cousin, the only great
name in philosophy for modern France--familiar as he is with North
Germany, can hardly be presumed unacquainted with a fact so striking,
if it _were_ a fact, as the extinction of a system once so triumphantly
supreme as that of Kant; and yet Mr. Bulwer, admiring Cousin as he
does, cannot but have noticed his efforts to naturalize Kant in France.
Meantime, if it were even true that transcendentalism had lost its
hold of the public mind in Germany, _prima facie_, this would prove
little more than the fickleness of that public which must have been
wrong in one of the two cases--either when adopting the system, or when
rejecting it. Whatever there may be of truth and value in the system
will remain unimpeached by such caprices, whether of an individual or
of a great nation; and England would still be in the right to import
the philosophy, however late in the day, if it were true even (which I
doubt greatly) that she _is_ importing it.

Both truth and value there certainly _is_ in one part of the Kantian
philosophy; and that part is its foundation. I had intended, at this
point, to introduce an outline of the transcendental philosophy--not,
perhaps, as entering by logical claim of right into any biographical
sketch, but as a very allowable digression in the record of that man's
life to whom, in the way of hope and of profound disappointment,
it had been so memorable an object. For two or three years before I
mastered the language of Kant,[18] it had been a pole-star to my hopes,
and _in hypothesi_, agreeably to the uncertain plans of uncertain
knowledge, the luminous guide to my future life--as a life dedicated
and set apart to philosophy. Such it was some years _before_ I knew
it: for at least ten long years _after_ I came into a condition of
valuing its true pretensions and measuring its capacities, this same
philosophy shed the gloom of something like misanthropy upon my views
and estimates of human nature; for man was an abject animal if the
limitations which Kant assigned to the motions of his speculative
reason were as absolute and hopeless as, under _his_ scheme of the
understanding and _his_ genesis of its powers, too evidently they were.
I belonged to a reptile race, if the wings by which we had sometimes
_seemed_ to mount, and the buoyancy which had _seemed_ to support our
flight, were indeed the fantastic delusions which he represented them.
Such, and so deep and so abiding in its influence upon my life, having
been the influence of this German philosophy, according to all logic of
proportions, in selecting the objects of my notice, I might be excused
for setting before the reader, in its full array, the analysis of its
capital sections. However, in any memorial of a life which professes to
keep in view (though but as a secondary purpose) any regard to popular
taste, the logic of proportions must bend, after all, to the law of
the occasion--to the proprieties of time and place. For the present,
therefore, I shall restrict myself to the few sentences in which it
may be proper to gratify the curiosity of _some_ readers, the two or
three in a hundred, as to the peculiar distinctions of this philosophy.
Even to these two or three out of each hundred I shall not venture
to ascribe a larger curiosity than with respect to the most general
"whereabouts" of its position--from what point it starts, whence and
from what aspect it surveys the ground, and by what links from this
starting point it contrives to connect itself with the main objects of
philosophic inquiry.

Immanuel Kant was originally a dogmatist in the school of Leibnitz
and Wolf; that is, according to his trisection of all philosophy
into dogmatic, sceptical, and critical, he was, upon all questions
disposed to a strong _affirmative_ creed, without courting any
particular examination into the grounds of this creed, or into its
assailable points. From this slumber, as it is called by himself, he
was suddenly aroused by the Humian doctrine of cause and effect. This
celebrated essay on the nature of necessary connexion--so thoroughly
misapprehended at the date of its first publication to the world by
its _soi-disant_ opponents, Oswald, Beattie, &c., and so imperfectly
comprehended since then by various _soi-disant_ defenders--became in
effect the "occasional cause" (in the phrase of the logicians) of the
entire subsequent philosophic scheme of Kant; every section of which
arose upon the accidental opening made to analogical trains of thought
by this memorable effort of scepticism applied by Hume to one capital
phenomenon among the necessities of the human understanding. What is
the nature of Hume's scepticism as applied to this phenomenon? What is
the main thesis of his celebrated Essay on Cause and Effect? For few,
indeed, are they who really know anything about it. If a man really
understands it, a very few words will avail to explain the _nodus_.
Let us try. It is a necessity of the _human_ understanding (very
probably not a necessity of a higher order of intelligences) to connect
its experiences by means of the idea of _cause_ and its correlate,
_effect_: and, when Beattie, Oswald, Reid, &c., were exhausting
themselves in proofs of the indispensableness of this idea, they were
fighting with shadows; for no man had ever questioned the practical
necessity for such an idea to the coherency of human thinking. Not the
practical necessity, but the internal consistency of this notion, and
the original right to such a notion, was the point of inquisition. For,
attend, courteous reader, and three separate propositions will set
before your eyes the difficulty. _First Prop._, which, for the sake of
greater precision, permit me to throw into Latin:--_Non datur aliquid_
[A] _quo posito ponitur aliud_ [B] _a priori_; that is, in other words,
You cannot lay your hands upon that one object or phenomenon [A] in the
whole circle of natural existences, which, being assumed, will entitle
you to assume _a priori_, any other object whatsoever [B] as succeeding
it. You could not, I say, of any object or phenomenon whatever, assume
this succession _a priori_--that is, _previously to experience_.
_Second Prop._ But, if the succession of B to A be made known to you,
not _a priori_ (by the involution of B in the idea of A), but by
experience, then you cannot ascribe _necessity_ to the succession:
the connection between them is not necessary but contingent. For the
very widest experience--an experience which should stretch over all
ages, from the beginning to the end of time--can never establish a
_nexus_ having the least approximation to necessity; no more than a
rope of sand could gain the cohesion of adamant by repeating its links
through a billion of successions. _Prop. Third._ Hence (_i.e._ from
the two preceding propositions), it appears that no instance or case
of _nexus_ that ever can have been offered to the notice of any human
understanding has in it, or by possibility could have had, anything
of necessity. Had the _nexus_ been necessary, you would have seen
it beforehand; whereas, by Prop. 1, _Non datur aliquid, quo posito
ponitur aliud a priori_. This being so, now comes the startling fact,
that the notion of a _cause_ includes the notion of necessity. For,
if A (the cause) be connected with B (the effect) only in a casual
or accidental way, you do not feel warranted in calling it a cause.
If heat, applied to ice (A) were sometimes followed by a tendency to
liquefaction (B) and sometimes not, you would not consider A connected
with B as a cause, but only as some variable accompaniment of the true
and unknown cause, which might allowably be present or be absent.
This, then, is the startling and mysterious phenomenon of the human
understanding--that, in a certain notion, which is indispensable to the
coherency of our whole experience, indispensable to the establishing
any _nexus_ between the different parts and successions of our whole
train of notions, we include an accessary notion of necessity, which
yet has no justification or warrant, no assignable derivation from
any known or possible case of human experience. We have one idea at
least--viz. the idea of causation--which transcends our possible
experience by one important element, the element of _necessity_, that
never can have been derived from the only source of ideas recognised
by the philosophy of this day. A Lockian never can find his way out of
this dilemma. The experience (whether it be the experience of sensation
or the experience of reflection) which he adopts for his master-key
never will unlock this case; for the sum total of human experience,
collected from all ages, can avail only to tell us what _is_, but never
what _must be_. The idea of necessity is absolutely transcendent to
experience, _per se_, and must be derived from some other source. From
what source? Could Hume tell us? No: he, who had started the game so
acutely (for, with every allowance for the detection made in Thomas
Aquinas of the original suggestion, as recorded in the _Biographia
Literaria_ of Coleridge, we must still allow great merit of a secondary
kind to Hume for his modern revival and restatement of the doctrine),
this same acute philosopher broke down confessedly in his attempt to
hunt the game down. His solution is worthless.

Kant, however, having caught the original scent from Hume, was
more fortunate. He saw, at a glance, that here was a test applied
to the Lockian philosophy, which showed, at the very least,
its _insufficiency_. If it were good even for so much as it
explained--which Burke is disposed to receive as a sufficient warrant
for the favourable reception of a new hypothesis--at any rate, it now
appeared that there was something which it could _not_ explain. But,
next, Kant took a large step in advance _proprio marte_. Reflecting
upon the one idea adduced by Hume as transcending the ordinary source
of ideas, he began to ask himself whether it were likely that this idea
should stand alone? Were there not other ideas in the same predicament;
other ideas including the same element of necessity, and, therefore,
equally disowning the parentage assigned by Locke? Upon investigation,
he found that there were: he found that there were eleven others in
exactly the same circumstances. The entire twelve he denominated
categories; and the mode by which he ascertained their number--that
there were so many and no more--is of itself so remarkable as to
merit notice in the most superficial sketch. But, in fact, this one
explanation will put the reader in possession of Kant's system, so
far as he could understand it without an express and toilsome study.
With this explanation, therefore, of the famous categories, I shall
close my slight sketch of the system. Has the reader ever considered
the meaning of the term _Category_--a term so ancient and so venerable
from its connexion with the most domineering philosophy that has yet
appeared amongst men? The doctrine of the Categories (or, in its
Roman appellation, of the _Predicaments_) is one of the few wrecks
from the Peripatetic philosophy which still survives as a doctrine
taught by public authority in the most ancient academic institutions
of Europe.[19] It continues to form a section in the code of public
instruction; and perhaps under favour of a pure accident. For, though,
strictly speaking, a _metaphysical_ speculation, it has always been
prefixed as a sort of preface to the Organon (or _logical_ treatises)
of Aristotle, and has thus accidentally shared in the immortality
conceded to that most perfect of human works. Far enough were the
Categories from meriting such distinction. Kant was well aware of this:
he was aware that the Aristotelian Categories were a useless piece
of scholastic lumber: unsound in their first conception; and, though
illustrated through long centuries by the schoolmen, and by still
earlier Grecian philosophers, never in any one known instance turned
to a profitable account. Why, then, being aware that even in idea they
were false, besides being practically unsuitable, did Kant adopt or
borrow a name laden with this superfetation of reproach--all that is
false in theory superadded to all that is useless in practice? He did
so for a remarkable reason: he felt, according to his own explanation,
that Aristotle had been _groping_ (the German word expressive of his
blind procedure is _herumtappen_)--groping in the dark, but under a
semi-conscious instinct of truth. Here is a most remarkable case or
situation of the human intellect, happening alike to individuals
and to entire generations--in the situation of yearning or craving,
as it were, for a great idea as yet unknown, but dimly and uneasily
prefigured.

Sometimes the very brink, as it may be called, of such an idea is
approached; sometimes it is even imperfectly discovered; but with marks
in the very midst of its imperfections which serve as indications to a
person coming better armed for ascertaining the sub-conscious thought
which had governed their tentative motions. As it stands in Aristotle's
scheme, the idea of a category is a mere lifeless abstraction.
Rising through a succession of species to genera, and from these to
still higher genera, you arrive finally at a highest genus--a naked
abstraction, beyond which no farther regress is possible. This highest
genus, this _genus generalissimum_, is, in peripatetic language, a
category; and no purpose or use has ever been assigned to any one of
these categories, of which ten were enumerated at first, beyond that
of classification--_i.e._ a purpose of mere convenience. Even for as
trivial a purpose as this, it gave room for suspecting a failure,
when it was afterwards found that the original ten categories did
not exhaust the possibilities of the case; that other supplementary
categories (_post-proedicamenta_) became necessary. And, perhaps,
"more last words" might even yet be added, supplementary supplements,
and so forth, by a hair-splitting intellect. Failures as gross as
these, revisals still open to revision, and amendments calling for
amendments, were at once a broad confession that here there was no
falling in with any great law of nature. The paths of nature may
sometimes be arrived at in a tentative way; but they are broad and
determinate; and, when found, vindicate themselves. Still, in all this
erroneous subtilisation, and these abortive efforts, Kant perceived a
grasping at some real idea--fugitive indeed and coy, which had for the
present absolutely escaped; but he caught glimpses of it continually
in the rear; he felt its necessity to any account of the human
understanding that could be satisfactory to one who had meditated on
Locke's theory as probed and searched by Leibnitz. And in this uneasy
state--half sceptical, half creative, rejecting and substituting,
pulling down and building up--what was, in sum and finally, the course
which he took for bringing his trials and essays to a crisis? He
states this himself, somewhere in the Introduction to his _Critik der
reinen Vernunft_; and the passage is a memorable one. Fifteen years
at the least have passed since I read it; and, therefore, I cannot
pretend to produce the words; but the substance I shall give; and I
appeal to the candour of all his readers whether they have been able
to apprehend his meaning. I certainly did not for years. But, now
that I do, the passage places his procedure in a most striking and
edifying light. Astronomers, says Kant, had gone on for ages, assuming
that the earth was the central body of our system; and insuperable
were the difficulties which attended that assumption. At length, it
occurred to try what would result from inverting the assumption. Let
the earth, instead of offering a fixed centre for the revolving motions
of other heavenly bodies, be supposed itself to revolve about some
one of these, as the sun. That supposition was tried, and gradually
all the phenomena which, before, had been incoherent, anomalous,
or contradictory, began to express themselves as parts of a most
harmonious system. "Something," he goes on to say, "analogous to this
I have practised with regard to the subject of my inquiry--the human
understanding. All others had sought their central principle of the
intellectual phenomena out of the understanding, in something external
to the mind. I first turned my inquiries upon the mind itself. I first
applied my examination to the very analysis of the understanding." In
words not precisely these, but pretty nearly equivalent to them, does
Kant state, by contradistinction, the value and the nature of his own
procedure. He first, according to his own representation, thought of
applying his investigation to the mind itself. Here was a passage which
for years (I may say) continued to stagger and confound me. What! he,
Kant, in the latter end of the 18th century, about the year 1787--he
the first who had investigated the mind! This was not arrogance so
much as it was insanity. Had he said--I, first, upon just principles,
or with a fortunate result, investigated the human understanding, he
would have said no more than every fresh theorist is bound to suppose,
as his preliminary apology for claiming the attention of a busy world.
Indeed, if a writer, on any part of knowledge, does _not_ hold himself
superior to all his predecessors, we are entitled to say--Then, why do
you presume to trouble us? It may _look_ like modesty, but _is_, in
effect, downright effrontery, for you to think yourself no better than
other critics; you were at liberty to think so whilst no claimant of
public notice--as being so, it is most arrogant in you to be modest.
This would be the criticism applied justly to a man who, in Kant's
situation, as the author of a new system, should use a language of
unseasonable modesty or deprecation. To have spoken boldly of himself
was a duty; we could not tolerate his doing otherwise. But to speak of
himself in the exclusive terms I have described does certainly seem,
and for years did seem to myself, little short of insanity. Of this I
am sure,--that no student of Kant, having the passage before him, can
have known heretofore what consistent, what rational interpretation
to give it; and, in candour, he ought to own himself my debtor for
the light he will now receive. Yet, so easy is it to imagine, after a
meaning is once pointed out, and the station given from which it shows
itself _as_ the meaning--so easy, under these circumstances, is it
to imagine that one has, or that one could have, found it for one's
self--that I have little expectation of reaping much gratitude for
my explanation. I say this, not as of much importance one way or the
other in a single case of the kind, but because a general consideration
of this nature has sometimes operated to make me more indifferent or
careless as to the publication of commentaries on difficult systems
when I had found myself able to throw much light on the difficulties.
The very success with which I should have accomplished the task--the
perfect removal of the obstacles in the student's path--were the very
grounds of my assurance that the service would be little valued. For
I have found what it was occasionally, in conversation, to be too
luminous--to have explained, for instance, too clearly a dark place
in Ricardo. In such a case, I have known a man of the very greatest
powers mistake the intellectual effort he had put forth to apprehend my
elucidation, and to meet it half way, for his own unassisted conquest
over the difficulties; and, within an hour or two after, I have had,
perhaps, to stand, as an attack upon myself, arguments entirely and
recently furnished by myself. No case is more possible: even to
apprehend complex explanation, a man cannot be passive; he must exert
considerable energy of mind; and, in the fresh consciousness of this
energy, it is the most natural mistake in the world for him to feel
the argument which he has by considerable effort appropriated to be an
argument which he has originated. Kant is the most unhappy champion of
his own doctrines, the most infelicitous expounder of his own meaning,
that has ever existed. Neither has any other commentator succeeded in
throwing a moonlight radiance upon his philosophy. Yet certain I am
that, were I, or any man, to disperse all his darkness, exactly in
that proportion in which we did so--exactly in the proportion in which
we smoothed all hindrances--exactly in that proportion would it cease
to be known or felt that there had ever been any hindrances to be
smoothed. This, however, is digression, to which I have been tempted
by the interesting nature of the grievance. In a jesting way, this
grievance is obliquely noticed in the celebrated couplet--

     "Had you seen but these roads before they were made,
     You'd lift up your hands and bless Marshal Wade."

The pleasant bull here committed conceals a most melancholy truth,
and one of large extent. Innumerable are the services to truth, to
justice, or society, which never _can_ be adequately valued by those
who reap their benefits, simply because the transition from the early
and bad state to the final or improved state cannot be retraced or kept
alive before the eyes. The record perishes. The last point gained is
seen; but the starting point, the point _from_ which it was gained,
is forgotten. And the traveller never _can_ know the true amount of
his obligations to Marshal Wade, because, though seeing the roads
which the Marshal has created, he can only guess at those which he
superseded. Now, returning to this impenetrable passage of Kant, I will
briefly inform the reader that he may read it into sense by connecting
it with a part of Kant's system from which it is in his own delivery
entirely dislocated. Going forwards some thirty or forty pages, he
will find Kant's development of his own categories. And, by placing
in juxtaposition with that development this blind sentence, he will
find a reciprocal light arising. All philosophers, worthy of that
name, have found it necessary to allow of some great cardinal ideas
that transcended all the Lockian origination--ideas that were larger
in their compass than any possible notices of sense or any reflex
notices of the understanding; and those who have denied such ideas
will be found invariably to have supported their denial by a _vitium
subreptionis_, and to have deduced their pretended genealogies of
such ideas by means of a _petitio principii_--silently and stealthily
putting _into_ some step of their _leger-de-main_ process everything
that they would pretend to have extracted _from_ it. But, previously
to Kant, it is certain that all philosophers had left the origin of
these higher or transcendent ideas unexplained. Whence came they? In
the systems to which Locke replies they had been called _innate_ or
_connate._ These were the Cartesian systems. Cudworth, again, who
maintained certain "_immutable ideas_" of morality, had said nothing
about their origin; and Plato had supposed them to be reminiscences
from some higher mode of existence. Kant first attempted to assign them
an origin within the mind itself, though not in any Lockian fashion of
reflection upon sensible impressions. And this is doubtless what he
means by saying that he first had investigated the mind--that is, he
first for such a purpose.

Where, then, is it, in what act or function of the mind, that Kant
finds the matrix of these transcendent ideas? Simply in the logical
forms of the understanding. Every power exerts its agency under some
_laws_--that is, in the language of Kant, by certain _forms_. We
leap by certain laws--viz., of equilibrium, of muscular motion, of
gravitation. We dance by certain laws. So also we reason by certain
laws. These laws, or _formal_ principles, under a particular condition,
become the categories.

Here, then, is a short derivation, in a very few words, of those
ideas transcending sense which all philosophy, the earliest, has been
unable to dispense with, and yet none could account for. Thus, for
example, every act of reasoning must, in the first place, express
itself in distinct propositions; that is, in such as contain a subject
(or that concerning which you affirm or deny something), a predicate
(that which you affirm or deny), and a copula, which connects them.
These propositions must have what is technically called, in logic, a
certain _quantity_, or compass (viz., must be universal, particular,
or singular); and again they must have what is called _quality_ (that
is, must be affirmative, or negative, or infinite): and thus arises a
ground for certain corresponding ideas, which are Kant's categories of
quantity and quality.

But, to take an illustration more appropriately from the very idea
which first aroused Kant to the sense of a vast hiatus in the received
philosophies--the idea of _cause_, which had been thrown as an apple
of discord amongst the schools by Hume. How did Kant deduce this?
Simply thus: it is a doctrine of universal logic that there are three
varieties of syllogism--viz., 1st, Categoric, or directly declarative
[_A is B_]; 2d, Hypothetic, or conditionally declarative [_If C is D,
then A is B_]; 3d, Disjunctive, or declarative by means of a choice
which exhausts the possible cases [_A is either B, or C, or D; but not
C or D, ergo B_]. Now, the idea of _causation,_ or, in Kant's language,
the category of Cause and Effect, is deduced immediately, and most
naturally, as the reader will acknowledge on examination, from the 2d
or hypothetic form of syllogism, when the relation of dependency is
the same as in the idea of causation, and the _necessary_ connexion a
direct type of that which takes place between a cause and its effect.

Thus, then, without going one step further, the reader will find
grounds enough for reflection, and for reverence towards Kant,
in these two great results: 1st, That an order of ideas has been
established which all deep philosophy has demanded, even when it
could not make good its claim. This postulate is fulfilled. 2dly, The
postulate is fulfilled without mysticism or Platonic reveries. Ideas,
however indispensable to human needs, and even to the connexion of
our thoughts, which came to us from nobody knew whence must for ever
have been suspicious; and, as in the memorable instance cited from
Hume, must have been liable for ever to a question of validity. But,
deduced as they now are from a matrix within our own minds, they cannot
reasonably fear any assaults of scepticism.

Here I shall stop. A reader new to these inquiries may think all this
a trifle. But he who reflects a little will see that, even thus far,
and going no step beyond this point, the Kantian doctrine of the
Categories answers a standing question hanging aloft as a challenge
to human philosophy, fills up a _lacuna_ pointed out from the era of
Plato. It solves a problem which has startled and perplexed every age:
viz. this--that man is in possession, nay, in the hourly exercise, of
ideas larger than he can show any title to. And, in another way, the
reader may measure the extent of this doctrine, by reflecting that,
even so far as now stated, it is precisely coextensive with the famous
scheme of Locke. For what is the capital thesis of that scheme? Simply
this--that all necessity for supposing immediate impressions made
upon our understandings by God, or other supernatural, or antenatal,
or connatal, agencies, is idle and romantic; for that, upon examining
the furniture of our minds, nothing will be found there which cannot
adequately be explained out of our daily experience; and, until we find
something that cannot be solved by this explanation, it is childish
to go in quest of higher causes. Thus says Locke: and his whole work,
upon its first plan, is no more than a continual pleading of this
single thesis, pursuing it through all the plausible objections.
Being, therefore, as large in its extent as Locke, the reader must
not complain of the transcendental scheme as too narrow, even in that
limited section of it here brought under his notice.

For the purpose of repelling it, he must do one of two things: either
he must shew that these categories or transcendent notions are not
susceptible of the derivation and genesis here assigned to them--that
is, from the forms of the _logos_ or formal understanding; or, if
content to abide by that derivation, he must allege that there are
other categories besides those enumerated, and unprovided with any
similar parentage.

Thus much in reply to him who complains of the doctrine here stated
as, 1st, Too narrow, or, 2d, As insufficiently established. But, 3d,
in reply to him who wishes to see it further pursued or applied, I say
that the possible applications are perhaps infinite. With respect to
those made by Kant himself, they are chiefly contained in his main and
elementary work, the _Critik der reinen Vernunft_; and they are of a
nature to make any man melancholy. Indeed, let a man consider merely
this one notion of _causation_; let him reflect on its origin; let him
remember that, agreeably to this origin, it follows that we have no
right to view anything _in rerum naturâ_ as objectively, or in itself,
a cause; that, when, upon the fullest philosophic proof, we call A
the cause of B, we do in fact only subsume A under the notion of a
cause--we invest it with that function under that relation; that the
whole proceeding is merely with respect to a _human_ understanding, and
by way of indispensable _nexus_ to the several parts of our experience;
finally, that there is the greatest reason to doubt whether the idea
of _causation_ is at all applicable to any other world than this, or
any other than a human experience. Let a man meditate but a little on
this or other aspects of this transcendental philosophy, and he will
find the steadfast earth itself rocking as it were beneath his feet;
a world about him which is in some sense a world of deception; and a
world before him which seems to promise a world of confusion, or "_a
world not realised_." All this he might deduce for himself without
further aid from Kant. However, the particular purposes to which Kant
applies his philosophy, from the difficulties which beset them, are
unfitted for anything below a regular treatise. Suffice it to say here,
that, difficult as these speculations are from one or two embarrassing
doctrines on the Transcendental Consciousness, and depressing as they
are from their general tendency, they are yet painfully irritating to
the curiosity, and especially so from a sort of _experimentum crucis_
which they yield in the progress of their development on behalf of the
entire doctrine of Kant--a test which, up to this hour, has offered
defiance to any hostile hand. The test or defiance which I speak
of takes the shape of certain _antinomies_ (so they are termed),
severe adamantine arguments, affirmative and negative, on two or
three celebrated problems, with no appeal to any possible decision,
but one which involves the Kantian doctrines. A _quæstio vexata_ is
proposed--for instance, the _infinite divisibility of matter_; each
side of this question, _thesis_ and _antithesis_, is argued; the logic
is irresistible, the links are perfect, and for each side alternately
there is a verdict, thus terminating in the most triumphant _reductio
ad absurdum_,--viz. that A, at one and the same time and in the same
sense, is and is not B,--from which no escape is available but through
a Kantian solution. On any other philosophy, it is demonstrated that
this opprobrium of the human understanding, this scandal of logic,
cannot be removed. This celebrated chapter of _antinomies_ has been of
great service to the mere polemics of the transcendental philosophy:
it is a glove or gage of defiance, constantly lying on the ground,
challenging the rights of victory and supremacy so long as it is _not_
taken up by any antagonist, and bringing matters to a short decision
when it _is._

One section, and that the introductory section, of the transcendental
philosophy, I have purposely omitted, though in strictness not to be
insulated or dislocated from the faithful exposition even of that which
I have given. It is the doctrine of Space and Time. These profound
themes, so confounding to the human understanding, are treated by
Kant under two aspects--_1st_, as Anschauungen, or _Intuitions_--(so
the German word is usually translated for want of a better); _2dly_,
as forms, _a priori_, of all our other intuitions. Often have I
laughed internally at the characteristic exposure of Kant's style of
thinking--that he, a man of so much worldly sagacity, could think of
offering, and of the German scholastic habits, that any modern nation
could think of accepting such cabalistic phrases, such a true and very
"_Ignotium per Ignotius_," in part payment of an explanatory account
of Time and Space. Kant repeats these words--as a charm before which
all darkness flies; and he supposes continually the case of a man
denying his explanations or demanding proofs of them, never once the
sole imaginable case--viz., of all men demanding an explanation of
these explanations. Deny them! Combat them! How should a man deny, why
should he combat, what might, for anything to the contrary appearing,
contain a promissory note at two months after date for 100 guineas? No;
it will cost a little preliminary work before _such_ explanations will
much avail any scheme of philosophy, either for the _pro_ or the _con_.
And yet I do myself really profess to understand the dark words; and
a great service it would be to sound philosophy amongst us, if this
one word _anschauung_ were adequately unfolded and naturalized (as
naturalized it might be) in the English philosophic dictionary, by some
full Grecian equivalent. Strange that no man acquainted with German
philosophy should yet have been struck by the fact--or, being struck,
should not have felt it important to call public attention to the
fact,--of our inevitable feebleness in a branch of study for which as
yet we want the indispensable words. Our feebleness is at once argued
by this want, and partly caused. Meantime, as respects the Kantian way
of viewing space, by much the most important innovation which it makes
upon the old doctrines is--that it considers space as a _subjective_
not an _objective_ aliquid; that is, as having its whole available
foundation lying ultimately in ourselves, not in any external or alien
tenure. This one distinction, as applied to space, for ever secures
(what nothing else _can_ secure or explain) the cogency of geometrical
evidence. Whatever is true for any determinations of a space originally
included in ourselves, must be true for such determinations for ever,
since they cannot become objects of consciousness to us but in and
by that very mode of conceiving space, that very form of schematism
which originally presented us with these determinations of space, or
any whatever. In the uniformity of our own space-conceiving faculty we
have a pledge of the absolute and _necessary_ uniformity (or internal
agreement among themselves) of all future or possible determinations of
space; because they could no otherwise become to us conceivable forms
of space than by adapting themselves to the known conditions of our
conceiving faculty. Here we have the _necessity_ which is indispensable
to all geometrical demonstration: it is a necessity founded in our
human organ, which cannot admit or conceive a space, unless as
preconforming to these original forms or schematisms. Whereas, on
the contrary, if space were something _objective_, and consequently,
being a separate existence, independent of a human organ, then it is
altogether impossible to find any intelligible source of _obligation_
or cogency in the evidence--such as is indispensable to the very nature
of geometrical demonstration. Thus we will suppose that a regular
demonstration has gradually, from step to step downwards, through a
series of propositions--No. 8 resting upon 7, that upon 5, 5 upon 3--at
length reduced you to the elementary axiom that Two straight lines
cannot enclose a space. Now, if space be _subjective_ originally--that
is to say, founded (as respects us and our geometry) in ourselves--then
it is impossible that two such lines can enclose a space, because
the possibility of anything whatever relating to the determinations
of space is exactly co-extensive with (and exactly expressed by) our
power to conceive it. Being thus able to affirm its impossibility
universally, we can build a demonstration upon it. But, on the other
hypothesis, of space being _objective_, it is impossible to guess
whence we are to draw our proof of the alleged inaptitude in two
straight lines for enclosing a space. The most we could say is, that
hitherto no instance has been found of an enclosed space circumscribed
by two straight lines. It would not do to allege our human inability
to conceive, or in imagination to draw, such a circumscription. For,
besides that such a mode of argument is exactly the one supposed to
have been rejected, it is liable to this unanswerable objection, so
long as space is assumed to have an _objective_ existence, viz. that
the human inability to conceive such a possibility only argues (what
in fact is often found in other cases) that the _objective_ existence
of space--_i.e._ the existence of space in itself, and in its absolute
nature--is far larger than its subjective existence--_i.e._ than
its mode of existing _quoad_ some particular subject. A being more
limited than man might be so framed as to be unable to conceive curve
lines; but this subjective inaptitude for those determinations of
space would not affect the objective reality of curves, or even their
subjective reality for a higher intelligence. Thus, on the hypothesis
of an objective existence for space, we should be thrown upon an ocean
of possibilities, without a test for saying what was--what was not
possible. But, on the other hypothesis, having always in the last
resort what is _subjectively_ possible or impossible (_i.e._ what is
conceivable or not by us, what can or cannot be drawn or circumscribed
by a human imagination), we have the means of demonstration in our
power, by having the ultimate appeals in our power to a known uniform
test--viz. a known human faculty.

This is no trifling matter, and therefore no trifling advantage on the
side of Kant and his philosophy, to all who are acquainted with the
disagreeable controversies of late years among French geometricians of
the first rank, and sometimes among British ones, on the question of
mathematical evidence. Legendre and Professor Leslie took part in one
such a dispute; and the temper in which it was managed was worthy of
admiration, as contrasted with the angry controversies of elder days,
if, indeed, it did not err in an opposite spirit, by too elaborate and
too calculating a tone of reciprocal flattery. But, think as we may
of the discussion in this respect, most assuredly it was painful to
witness so infirm a philosophy applied to an interest so mighty. The
whole aerial superstructure--the heaven-aspiring pyramid of geometrical
synthesis--all tottered under the palsying logic of evidence, to which
these celebrated mathematicians appealed. And wherefore?--From the want
of any philosophic account of space, to which they might have made
a common appeal, and which might have so far discharged its debt to
truth as at least to reconcile its theory with the great outstanding
phenomena in the most absolute of sciences. Geometry is the _science_
of space: therefore, in any _philosophy_ of space, geometry is entitled
to be peculiarly considered, and used as a court of appeal. Geometry
has these two further claims to distinction--that, 1st, It is the most
perfect of the sciences, so far as it has gone; and, 2dly, That it
has gone the farthest. A philosophy of space which does not consider
and does not reconcile to its own doctrines the facts of geometry,
which, in the two points of beauty and of vast extent, is more like
a work of nature than of man, is, _prima facie_, of no value. A
philosophy of space _might_ be false which should harmonize with the
facts of geometry--it _must_ be false if it contradict them. Of Kant's
philosophy it is a capital praise that its very opening section--that
section which treats the question of space--not only quadrates with
the facts of geometry, but also, by the _subjective_ character which
it attributes to space, is the very first philosophic scheme which
explains and accounts for the cogency of geometrical evidence.

These are the two primary merits of the transcendental theory--_1st_,
Its harmony with mathematics, and the fact of having first, by its
doctrine of space, applied philosophy to the nature of geometrical
evidence; _2dly_, That it has filled up, by means of its doctrine
of categories, the great _hiatus_ in all schemes of the human
understanding from Plato downwards. All the rest, with a reserve
as to the part which concerns the _practical_ reason (or will), is
of more questionable value, and leads to manifold disputes. But I
contend that, had transcendentalism done no other service than that
of laying a foundation, sought but not found for ages, to the human
understanding--namely, by showing an intelligible genesis to certain
large and indispensable ideas--it would have claimed the gratitude
of all profound inquirers. To a reader still disposed to undervalue
Kant's service in this respect, I put one parting question--Wherefore
he values Locke? What has _he_ done, even if value is allowed in full
to his pretensions? Has the reader asked himself _that_? He gave a
_negative_ solution at the most. He told his reader that certain
disputed ideas were _not_ deduced thus and thus. Kant, on the other
hand, has given him at the least a _positive_ solution. He teaches him,
in the profoundest revelation, by a discovery in the most absolute
sense on record, and the most entirely a single act--without parts, or
contributions, or stages, or preparations from other quarters--that
these long disputed ideas could not be derived from the experience
assigned by Locke, inasmuch as they are themselves _previous conditions
under which any experience at all is possible_: he teaches him that
these ideas are not mystically originated, but are, in fact, but
another phasis of the functions or forms of his own understanding; and,
finally, he gives consistency, validity, and a charter of authority,
to certain modes of _nexus_ without which the sum total of human
experience would be a rope of sand.

In terminating this slight account of the Kantian philosophy, I may
mention that, in or about the year 1818-19, Lord Grenville, when
visiting the lakes of England, observed to Professor Wilson that, after
five years' study of this philosophy, he had not gathered from it one
clear idea. Wilberforce, about the same time, made the same confession
to another friend of my own.

It is not usual for men to meet with their capital disappointments
in early life, at least not in youth. For, as to disappointments in
love, which are doubtless the most bitter and incapable of comfort,
though otherwise likely to arise in youth, they are in this way made
impossible at a very early age, that no man can be in love to the
whole extent of his capacity until he is in full possession of all
his faculties, and with the sense of dignified maturity. A perfect
love, such as is necessary to the anguish of a perfect disappointment,
presumes also for its object not a mere girl, but woman, mature
both in person and character, and womanly dignity. This sort of
disappointment, in a degree which could carry its impression through
life, I cannot therefore suppose occurring earlier than at twenty-five
or twenty-seven. My disappointment--the profound shock with which I
was repelled from German philosophy, and which thenceforwards tinged
with cynical disgust towards man in certain aspects a temper which
originally I will presume to consider the most benign that can ever
have been created--occurred when I was yet in my twentieth year. In a
poem under the title of _Saul_, written many years ago by Mr. Sotheby,
and perhaps now forgotten, having never been popular, there occurs a
passage of some pathos, in which Saul is described as keeping amongst
the splendid equipments of a royal wardrobe that particular pastoral
habit which he had worn in his days of earliest manhood, whilst yet
humble and undistinguished by honour, but also yet innocent and
happy. There, also, with the same care, he preserved his shepherd's
crook, which, in hands of youthful vigour, had been connected with
remembrances of heroic prowess. These memorials, in after times of
trouble or perplexity, when the burthen of royalty, its cares, or its
feverish temptations, pointed his thoughts backwards, for a moment's
relief, to scenes of pastoral gaiety and peace, the heart-wearied
prince would sometimes draw from their repository, and in solitude
would apostrophise them separately, or commune with the bitter-sweet
remembrances which they recalled. In something of the same spirit--but
with a hatred to the German philosopher such as men are represented as
feeling towards the gloomy enchanter, Zamiel or whomsoever, by whose
hateful seductions they have been placed within a circle of malign
influences--did I at times revert to Kant: though for me his power had
been of the very opposite kind; not an enchanter's, but the power of
a disenchanter--and a disenchanter the most profound. As often as I
looked into his works, I exclaimed in my heart, with the widowed queen
of Carthage, using her words in an altered application--

     "Quæsivit lucem--_ingemuitque repertâ_."

Had the transcendental philosophy corresponded to my expectations,
and had it left important openings for further pursuit, my purpose
then was to have retired, after a few years spent in Oxford, to the
woods of Lower Canada. I had even marked out the situation for a
cottage and a considerable library, about seventeen miles from Quebec.
I planned nothing so ambitious as a scheme of _Pantisocracy_. My
object was simply profound solitude, such as cannot now be had in any
part of Great Britain--with two accessary advantages, also peculiar
to countries situated in the circumstances and under the climate
of Canada: viz. the exalting presence in an under-consciousness of
forests endless and silent, the everlasting sense of living amongst
forms so ennobling and impressive, together with the pleasure attached
to natural agencies, such as frost, more powerfully manifested than
in English latitudes, and for a much longer period. I hope there is
nothing fanciful in all this. It is certain that in England, and in
all moderate climates, we are too slightly reminded of nature or the
forces of nature. Great heats, or great colds (and in Canada there are
both), or great hurricanes, as in the West Indian latitudes, recall us
continually to the sense of a powerful presence, investing our paths on
every side; whereas in England it is possible to forget that we live
amongst greater agencies than those of men and human institutions. Man,
in fact, "too much man," as Timon complained most reasonably in Athens,
was then, and is now, our greatest grievance in England. Man is a weed
everywhere too rank. A strange place must that be with us from which
the sight of a hundred men is not before us, or the sound of a thousand
about us.

Nevertheless, being in this hotbed of man inevitably for some years, no
sooner had I dismissed my German philosophy than I relaxed a little
that spirit of German abstraction which it had prompted; and, though
never mixing freely with society, I began to look a little abroad. It
may interest the reader, more than anything else which I can record of
this period, to recall what I saw within the ten first years of the
century that was at all noticeable or worthy of remembrance amongst the
literati, the philosophers, or the poets of the time. For, though I am
now in my academic period from 1804 to 1808, my knowledge of literary
men--or men distinguished in some way or other, either by their
opinions, their accomplishments, or their position and the accidents
of their lives--began from the first year of the century, or, more
accurately, from the year 1800; which, with some difficulty and demurs,
and with some arguments from the Laureate Pye, the world was at length
persuaded to consider the last year of the eighteenth century.[20]

It was in the year 1801, whilst yet at school, that I made my first
literary acquaintance. This was with a gentleman now dead, and little,
at any time, known in the literary world; indeed, not at all; for his
authorship was confined to a department of religious literature as
obscure and as narrow in its influence as any that can be named--viz.
Swedenborgianism.

Already, on the bare mention of that word, a presumption arises
against any man, that, writing much (or writing at all) for a body of
doctrines so apparently crazy as those of Mr. Swedenborg, a man must
have bid adieu to all good sense and manliness of mind. Indeed, this
is so much of a settled case, that even to have written _against_ Mr.
Swedenborg would be generally viewed as a suspicious act, requiring
explanation, and not very easily admitting of it. _Mr._ Swedenborg I
call him, because I understand that his title to call himself "Baron"
is imaginary; or rather he never _did_ call himself by any title
of honour--that mistake having originated amongst his followers in
this country, who have chosen to designate him as the "Honourable"
and as the "Baron" Swedenborg, by way of translating, to the ear of
England, some one or other of those irrepresentable distinctions,
_Legations-Rath_, _Hofrath_, _&c._, which are tossed about with so
much profusion in the courts of continental Europe, on both sides the
Baltic. For myself, I cannot think myself qualified to speak of any
man's writings without a regular examination of some one or two among
those which his admirers regard as his best performances. Yet, as any
happened to fall in my way, I have looked into them; and the impression
left upon my mind was certainly not favourable to their author. They
laboured, to my feeling, with two opposite qualities of annoyance, but
which I believe not uncommonly found united in lunatics--excessive
dulness or matter-of-factness in the execution, with excessive
extravagance in the conceptions. The result, at least, was most
unhappy: for, of all writers, Swedenborg is the only one I ever heard
of who has contrived to strip even the shadowy world beyond the grave
of all its mystery and all its awe. From the very heaven of heavens,
he has rent away the veil; no need for seraphs to "tremble while they
gaze"; for the familiarity with which all objects are invested makes it
impossible that even poor mortals should find any reason to tremble.
Until I saw this book, I had not conceived it possible to carry an
atmosphere so earthy, and steaming with the vapours of earth, into
regions which, by early connexion in our infant thoughts with the
sanctities of death, have a hold upon the reverential affections such
as they rarely lose. In this view, I should conceive that Swedenborg,
if it were at all possible for him to become a popular author, would,
at the same time, become immensely mischievous. He would dereligionize
men beyond all other authors whatsoever.

Little could this character of Swedenborg's writings--this, indeed,
least of all--have been suspected from the temper, mind, or manners
of my new friend. He was the most spiritual-looking, the most saintly
in outward aspect, of all human beings whom I have known throughout
life. He was rather tall, pale, and thin; the most unfleshly, the most
of a sublimated spirit dwelling already more than half in some purer
world, that a poet could have imagined. He was already aged when I
first knew him, a clergyman of the Church of England; which may seem
strange in connexion with his Swedenborgianism; but he was, however,
so. He was rector of a large parish in a large town, the more active
duties of which parish were discharged by his curate; but much of
the duties within the church were still discharged by himself, and
with such exemplary zeal that his parishioners, afterwards celebrating
the fiftieth anniversary, or _golden_ jubilee of his appointment to
the living (the twenty-fifth anniversary is called in German the
silver--the fiftieth, the golden jubilee), went farther than is
usual in giving a public expression and a permanent shape to their
sentiments of love and veneration. I am surprised, on reflection,
that this venerable clergyman should have been unvexed by Episcopal
censures. He might, and I dare say would, keep back the grosser parts
of Swedenborg's views from a public display; but, in one point, it
would not be easy for a man so conscientious to make a compromise
between his ecclesiastical duty and his private belief; for I have
since found, though I did not then know it, that Swedenborg held a very
peculiar creed on the article of atonement. From the slight pamphlet
which let me into this secret I could not accurately collect the exact
distinctions of his creed; but it was very different from that of the
English Church.

However, my friend continued unvexed for a good deal more than fifty
years, enjoying that peace, external as well as internal, which,
by so eminent a title, belonged to a spirit so evangelically meek
and dovelike. I mention him chiefly for the sake of describing his
interesting house and household, so different from all which belong
to this troubled age, and his impressive style of living. The house
seemed almost monastic; and yet it stood in the centre of one of the
largest, busiest, noisiest towns in England; and the whole household
seemed to have stepped out of their places in some Vandyke, or even
some Titian, picture, from a forgotten century and another climate. On
knocking at the door, which of itself seemed an outrage to the spirit
of quietness which brooded over the place, you were received by an
ancient manservant in the sober livery which belonged traditionally
to Mr. ----'s[22] family; for he was of a gentleman's descent, and
had had the most finished education of a gentleman. This venerable old
butler put me in mind always, by his noiseless steps, of the Castle
of Indolence, where the porter or usher walked about in shoes that
were shod with felt, lest any rude echoes might be roused. An ancient
housekeeper was equally venerable, equally gentle in her deportment,
quiet in her movements, and inaudible in her tread. One or other of
these upper domestics,--for the others rarely crossed my path,--ushered
me always into some room expressing by its furniture, its pictures,
and its coloured windows, the solemn tranquillity which, for half a
century, had reigned in that mansion. Among the pictures were more
than one of St. John, the beloved apostle, by Italian masters. Neither
the features nor the expression were very wide of Mr. Clowes's own
countenance; and, had it been possible to forget the gross character
of Swedenborg's reveries, or to substitute for these fleshly dreams
the awful visions of the Apocalypse, one might have imagined easily
that the pure, saintly, and childlike evangelist had been once again
recalled to this earth, and that this most quiet of mansions was
some cell in the island of Patmos. Whence came the stained glass of
the windows I know not, and whether it were stained or painted. The
revolutions of that art are known from Horace Walpole's account; and,
nine years after this period, I found that, in Birmingham, where the
art of staining glass was chiefly practised, no trifling sum was
charged even for a vulgar lacing of no great breadth round a few
drawing-room windows, which one of my friends thought fit to introduce
as an embellishment. These windows, however, of my clerical friend were
really "_storied_ windows," having Scriptural histories represented
upon them. A crowning ornament to the library or principal room was a
sweet-toned organ, ancient, and elaborately carved in its wood-work, at
which my venerable friend readily sate down, and performed the music
of anthems as often as I asked him, sometimes accompanying it with
his voice, which was tremulous from old age, but neither originally
unmusical, nor (as might be perceived) untrained.

Often, from the storms and uproars of this world, I have looked back
upon this most quiet and, I believe, most innocent abode (had I said
saintly I should hardly have erred), conneacting it in thought with
_Little Gidding_, the famous mansion (in Huntingdonshire, I believe)
of the Farrers, an interesting family in the reigns of James I.
and Charles I. Of the Farrers there is a long and circumstantial
biographical account, and of the conventual discipline maintained at
Little Gidding. For many years it was the rule at Gidding--and it was
the wish of the Farrers to have transmitted that practice through
succeeding centuries--that a musical or cathedral service should be
going on at every hour of night and day in the chapel of the mansion.
Let the traveller, at what hour he would, morning or evening, summer
or winter, and in what generation or century soever, happen to
knock at the gate of Little Gidding, it was the purpose of Nicholas
Farrer--a sublime purpose--that always he should hear the blare of
the organ, sending upwards its surging volumes of melody, God's
worship for ever proceeding, anthems of praise for ever ascending,
and _jubilates_ echoing without end or known beginning. One stream
of music, in fact, never intermitting, one vestal fire of devotional
praise and thanksgiving, was to connect the beginnings with the ends
of generations, and to link one century into another. Allowing for
the sterner asceticism of N. Farrer--partly arising out of the times,
partly out of personal character, and partly, perhaps, out of his
travels in Spain--my aged friend's arrangement of the day, and the
training of his household, might seem to have been modelled on the
plans of Mr. Farrer; whom, however, he might never have heard of.
There was also, in each house, the same union of religion with some
cultivation of the ornamental arts, or some expression of respect
for them. In each case, a monastic severity, that might, under other
circumstances, have terminated in the gloom of a La Trappe, had been
softened by English sociality, and by the habits of a gentleman's
education, into a devotional pomp, reconcilable with Protestant views.
When, however, remembering this last fact in Mr. Clowes's case (the
fact I mean of his liberal education), I have endeavoured to explain
the possibility of one so much adorned by all the accomplishments
of a high-bred gentleman, and one so truly pious, falling into the
grossness, almost the sensuality, which appears to besiege the visions
of Swedenborg, I fancy that the whole may be explained out of the same
cause which occasionally may be descried, through a distance of two
complete centuries, as weighing heavily upon the Farrers--viz. the dire
monotony of daily life, when visited by no irritations either of hope
or fear--no hopes from ambition, no fears from poverty.

Nearly (if not quite) sixty years did my venerable friend inhabit
that same parsonage house, without any incident more personally
interesting to himself than a cold or a sore throat. And I suppose
that he resorted to Swedenborg--reluctantly, perhaps, at the first--as
to a book of fairy tales connected with his professional studies. And
one thing I am bound to add in candour, which may have had its weight
with him, that more than once, on casually turning over a volume of
Swedenborg, I have certainly found most curious and felicitous passages
of comment--passages which extracted a brilliant meaning from numbers,
circumstances, or trivial accidents, apparently without significance
or object, and gave to things, without a place or a habitation in the
critic's regard, a value as hieroglyphics or cryptical ciphers, which
struck me as elaborately ingenious. This acknowledgment I make not so
much in praise of Swedenborg, whom I must still continue to think a
madman, as in excuse for Mr. Clowes. It may easily be supposed that a
person of Mr. Clowes's consideration and authority was not regarded
with indifference by the general body of the Swedenborgians. At his
motion it was, I believe, that a society was formed for procuring and
encouraging a translation into English of Swedenborg's entire works,
most of which are written in Latin. Several of these translations are
understood to have been executed personally by Mr. Clowes; and in
this obscure way, for anything I know, he may have been an extensive
author. But it shows the upright character of the man that never, in
one instance, did he seek to bias my opinions in this direction. Upon
every other subject, he trusted me confidentially--and, notwithstanding
my boyish years (15-16), as his equal. His regard for me, when thrown
by accident in his way, had arisen upon his notice of my fervent
simplicity, and my unusual thoughtfulness. Upon these merits, I had
gained the honourable distinction of a general invitation to his
house, without exception as to days and hours, when few others could
boast of any admission at all. The common ground on which we met was
literature--more especially the Greek and Roman literature; and much
he exerted himself, in a spirit of the purest courtesy, to meet my
animation upon these themes. But the interest on his part was too
evidently a secondary interest in _me_, for whom he talked, and not in
the subject: he spoke much from memory, as it were of things that he
had once felt, and little from immediate sympathy with the author; and
his animation was artificial, though his courtesy, which prompted the
effort, was the truest and most unaffected possible.

The connexion between us must have been interesting to an observer;
for, though I cannot say with Wordsworth, of old Daniel and his
grandson, that there were "ninety good years of fair and foul weather"
between us, there were, however, sixty, I imagine, at the least;
whilst as a bond of connexion there was nothing at all that I know
of beyond a common tendency to reverie, which is a bad link for a
_social_ connexion. The little ardour, meantime, with which he had,
for many years, participated in the interests of this world, or all
that it inherits, was now rapidly departing. Daily and consciously he
was loosening all ties which bound him to earlier recollections; and,
in particular, I remember--because the instance was connected with my
last farewell visit, as it proved--that for some time he was engaged
daily in renouncing with solemnity (though often enough in cheerful
words) book after book of classical literature in which he had once
taken particular delight. Several of these, after taking his final
glance at a few passages to which a pencil reference in the margin
pointed his eye, he delivered to me as memorials in time to come of
himself. The last of the books given to me under these circumstances
was a Greek "Odyssey," in Clarke's edition. "This," said he, "is nearly
the sole book remaining to me of my classical library--which, for some
years, I have been dispersing amongst my friends. Homer I retained to
the last, and the 'Odyssey,' by preference to the 'Iliad,' both in
compliance with my own taste, and because this very copy was my chosen
companion for evening amusement during my freshman's term at Trinity
College, Cambridge--whither I went early in the spring of 1743. Your
own favourite Grecian is Euripides; but still you must value--we must
all value--Homer. I, even as old as I am, could still read him with
delight; and, as long as any merely human composition ought to occupy
my time, I should have made an exception in behalf of this solitary
author. But I am a soldier of Christ; the enemy, the last enemy, cannot
be far off; _sarcinas colligere_ is, at my age, the watchword for every
faithful sentinel, hourly to keep watch and ward, to wait and to be
vigilant. This very day I have taken my farewell glance at Homer, for
I must no more be found seeking my pleasure amongst the works of man;
and, that I may not be tempted to break my resolution, I make over this
my last book to you."

Words to this effect, uttered with his usual solemnity, accompanied his
gift; and, at the same time, he added, without any separate comment,
a little pocket Virgil--the one edited by Alexander Cunningham, the
bitter antagonist of Bentley--with a few annotations placed at the end.
The act was in itself a solemn one; something like taking the veil for
a nun--a final abjuration of the world's giddy agitations. And yet to
him--already and for so long a time linked so feebly to anything that
could be called the world, and living in a seclusion so profound--it
was but as if an anchorite should retire from his outer to his inner
cell. Me, however, it impressed powerfully in after years; because
this act of self-dedication to the next world, and of parting from
the intellectual luxuries of this, was also, in fact, though neither
of us at the time knew it to be such, the scene of his final parting
with myself. Immediately after his solemn speech, on presenting me
with the "Odyssey," he sat down to the organ, sang a hymn or two, then
chanted part of the liturgy, and, finally, at my request, performed the
anthem so well known in the English Church service--the collect for the
seventh Sunday after Trinity--(_Lord of all power and might, &c._) It
was summer--about half after nine in the evening; the light of day was
still lingering, and just strong enough to illuminate the Crucifixion,
the Stoning of the Protomartyr, and other grand emblazonries of the
Christian faith, which adorned the rich windows of his library. Knowing
the early hours of his household, I now received his usual fervent
adieus--which, without the words, had the sound and effect of a
benediction--felt the warm pressure of his hand, saw dimly the outline
of his venerable figure, more dimly his saintly countenance, and
quitted that gracious presence, which, in this world, I was destined
no more to revisit. The night was one in the first half of July 1802;
in the second half of which, or very early in August, I quitted school
clandestinely, and consequently the neighbourhood of Mr. Clowes. Some
years after, I saw his death announced in all the public journals,
as having occurred at Leamington Spa, then in the springtime of its
medicinal reputation. Farewell, early friend! holiest of men whom it
has been my lot to meet! Yes, I repeat, thirty-five years are past
since then, and I have yet seen few men approaching to this venerable
clergyman in paternal benignity--none certainly in child-like purity,
apostolic holiness, or in perfect alienation of heart from the spirit
of this fleshly world.

I have delineated the habits and character of Mr. Clowes at some
length, chiefly because a connexion is rare and interesting between
parties so widely asunder in point of age--one a schoolboy, and the
other almost an octogenarian, to quote a stanza from one of the most
spiritual sketches of Wordsworth--

     "We talked with open heart and tongue,
       Affectionate and free--
     A pair of friends, though I was young,
       And Matthew seventy-three."

I have stated a second reason for this record, in the fact that Mr.
Clowes was the first of my friends who had any connexion with the
press. At one time I have reason to believe that this connexion was
pretty extensive, though not publicly avowed, and so far from being
lucrative that at first I believe it to have been expensive to him,
and whatever profits might afterwards arise were applied, as much
of his regular income, to the benefit of others.[23] Here, again,
it seems surprising that a spirit so beneficent and, in the amplest
sense, charitable, could coalesce in any views with Swedenborg, who,
in some senses, was not charitable. Swedenborg had been scandalized
by a notion which, it seems, he found prevalent amongst the poor
of the Continent--viz., that, if riches were a drag and a negative
force on the road to religious perfection, poverty must be positive
title _per se_ to the favour of Heaven. Grievously offended with this
error, he came almost to hate poverty as a presumptive indication of
this offensive heresy; scarcely would he allow it an indirect value,
as removing in many cases the occasions or incitements of evil. No:
being in itself neutral and indifferent, he argued that it had become
erroneously a ground of presumptuous hope; whilst the rich man, aware
of his danger, was, in some degree, armed against it by fear and
humility. And, in this course of arguing and of corresponding feeling,
Mr. Swedenborg had come to hate the very name of a poor candidate for
Heaven, as bitterly as a sharking attorney hates the applications of a
pauper client. Yet so entirely is it true that "to the pure, all things
are pure," and that perfect charity "thinketh no ill," but is gifted
with a power to transmute all things into its own resemblance--so
entirely is all this true, that this most spiritual, and, as it were,
disembodied of men, could find delight in the dreams of the very
"fleshliest incubus" that has intruded amongst heavenly objects;
and, secondly, this benignest of men found his own pure feelings not
outraged by one who threw a withering scowl over the far larger half of
his fellow-creatures.

Concurrently with this acquaintance, so impressive and so elevating
to me, from the unusual sanctity of Mr. Clowes's character, I formed
another with a well-known coterie, more avowedly, and in a more
general sense, literary, resident at Liverpool or its neighbourhood.
In my sixteenth year [1801] I had accompanied my mother and family
on a summer's excursion to Everton, a well-known village upon the
heights immediately above Liverpool; though by this time I believe
it has thrown out so many fibres of connexion as to have become a
mere quarter or suburban "process" (to speak by anatomical phrase)
of the great town below it. In those days, however, distant by one
third of a century from ours, Everton was still a distinct village
(for a mile of ascent is worth three of level ground in the way of
effectual separation); it was delightfully refreshed by marine breezes,
though raised above the sea so far that its thunders could be heard
only under favourable circumstances. There we had a cottage for some
months; and the nearest of our neighbours happened to be that Mr.
Clarke, the banker, to whom acknowledgments are made in the _Lorenzo
the Magnificent_, for aid in procuring MSS. and information from Italy.
This gentleman called on my mother, merely in the general view of
offering neighbourly attentions to a family of strangers. I, as the
eldest of my brothers, and already with strong literary propensities,
had received a general invitation to his house. Thither I went, indeed,
early and late; and there I met Mr. Roscoe, Dr. Currie (who had just at
that time published his Life and Edition of Burns), and Mr. Shepherd of
Gatacre, the author of some works on Italian literature (particularly
a Life of _Poggio Bracciolini_), and, since then, well known to all
England by his Reform politics.

There were other members of this society--some, like myself, visitors
merely to that neighbourhood; but those I have mentioned were the
chief. Here I had an early opportunity of observing the natural
character and tendencies of merely literary society--by which society
I mean all such as, having no strong distinctions in power of thinking
or in native force of character, are yet raised into circles of
pretension and mark by the fact of having written a book, or of
holding a notorious connexion with some department or other of the
periodical press. No society is so vapid and uninteresting in its
natural quality, none so cheerless and petrific in its influence upon
others. Ordinary people, in such company, are in general repressed from
uttering with cordiality the natural expression of their own minds or
temperaments, under a vague feeling of some peculiar homage due, or
at least customarily paid, to those lions: such people are no longer
at their ease, or masters of their own natural motions in their own
natural freedom; whilst indemnification of any sort is least of all to
be looked for from the literary dons who have diffused this unpleasant
atmosphere of constraint. They disable others, and yet do nothing
themselves to fill up the void they have created. One and all--unless
by accident people of unusual originality, power, and also nerve, so
as to be able without trepidation to face the expectations of men--the
literary class labour under two opposite disqualifications for a good
tone of conversation. From causes visibly explained, they are either
spoiled by the vices of reserve, and of over-consciousness directed
upon themselves--this is one extreme; or, where manliness of mind has
prevented this, beyond others of equal or inferior natural power, they
are apt to be desperately commonplace. The first defect is an accident
arising out of the rarity of literary pretensions, and would rapidly
subside as the proportion became larger of practising literati to the
mass of educated people. But the other is an adjunct scarcely separable
from the ordinary prosecution of a literary career, and growing in fact
out of literature _per se_, as literature is generally understood.
That same day, says Homer, which makes a man a slave robs him of
half his value. That same hour which first awakens a child to the
consciousness of being observed, and to the sense of admiration, strips
it of its freedom and unpremeditated graces of motion. Awkwardness at
the least--and too probably, as a consequence of _that_, affectation
and conceit--follow hard upon the consciousness of special notice or
admiration. The very attempt to disguise embarrassment too often issues
in a secondary and more marked embarrassment.

Another mode of reserve arises with some literary men, who believe
themselves to be in possession of novel ideas. Cordiality of
communication, or ardour of dispute, might betray them into a
revelation of those golden thoughts, sometimes into a necessity of
revealing them, since, without such aid, it might be impossible
to maintain theirs in the discussion. On this principle it was--a
principle of deliberate unsocial reserve--that Adam Smith is said to
have governed his conversation; he professed to put a bridle on his
words, lest by accident a pearl should drop out of his lips amongst the
vigilant bystanders. And in no case would he have allowed himself to
be engaged in a disputation, because both the passions of dispute and
the necessities of dispute are alike apt to throw men off their guard.
A most unamiable reason it certainly is, which places a man in one
constant attitude of self-protection against petty larceny. And yet,
humiliating as that may be to human nature, the furtive propensities
or instincts of petty larceny are diffused most extensively through
all ranks--directed, too, upon a sort of property far more tangible
and more ignoble, as respects the possible motives of the purloiner,
than any property in subjects purely intellectual. Rather more than ten
years ago, a literary man of the name of Alton published, some little
time before his own death, a very searching essay upon this chapter
of human integrity--arraying a large list of common cases (cases of
hats, gloves, umbrellas, books, newspapers, &c.) where the claim
of ownership, left to itself and unsupported by accidents of shame
and exposure, appeared to be weak indeed amongst classes of society
prescriptively "respectable." And yet, for a double reason, literary
larceny is even more to be feared; both because it is countenanced by
a less ignoble quality of temptation, and because it is far more easy
of achievement--so easy, indeed, that it may be practised without any
clear accompanying consciousness.

I have myself witnessed or been a party to a case of the following
kind:--A new truth--suppose for example, a new doctrine or a new
theory--was communicated to a very able man in the course of
conversation, not _didactically_, or directly _as_ a new truth,
but _polemically_,--communicated as an argument in the current of
a dispute. What followed? Necessarily it followed that a very able
man would not be purely _passive_ in receiving this new truth; that
he would _co-operate_ with the communicator in many ways--as by
raising objections, by half dissipating his own objections, and in a
variety of other co-agencies. In such cases, a very clever man does
in effect half-generate the new idea for himself, but then he does
this entirely under your leading; you stand ready at each point of
possible deviation, to warn him away from the wrong turn--from the turn
which leads nowhither or the turn which leads astray. Yet the final
result has been that the _catechumen_, under the full consciousness
of _self_-exertion, has so far confounded his just and true belief of
having contributed to the evolution of the doctrine, _quoad_ his own
apprehension of it, with the far different case of having evolved the
truth itself into light, as to go off with the firm impression that the
doctrine had been a product of his own.[24] There is therefore ground
enough for the jealousy of Adam Smith, since a robbery may be committed
unconsciously; though, by the way, it is not a peril peculiarly
applicable to himself, who has not so much succeeded in discovering new
truths as in establishing a logical connexion amongst old ones.

On the other hand, it is not by reserve, whether of affectation or of
Smithian jealousy, that the majority of literary people offend--at
least not by the latter; for, so far from having much novelty to
protect against pirates, the most general effect of literary pursuits
is to tame down all points of originality to one standard of insipid
monotony. I shall not go into the reasons for this. I make my appeal
to the matter of fact. Try a Parisian populace, very many of whom are
highly cultivated by reading, against a body of illiterate rustics. Mr.
Scott of Aberdeen,[25] in his "Second Tour to Paris" (1815), tells us
that, on looking over the shoulder of poor stall women selling trifles
in the street, he usually found them reading Voltaire, Rousseau,
or even (as I think he adds) Montesquieu; but, notwithstanding the
polish which such reading both presumes as a previous condition and
produces as a natural effect, yet no people could be more lifeless in
their minds, or more barren of observing faculties, than they; and
so he describes them. Words! words! nothing but words! On the other
hand, listen to the conversation of a few scandalous village dames
collected at a tea-table. Vulgar as the spirit may be which possesses
them, and not seldom malicious, still how full of animation and of
keen perception it will generally be found, and of a learned spirit
of connoisseurship in human character, by comparison with the _fade_
generalities and barren recollections of mere literati!

All this was partially illustrated in the circle to which I was now
presented. Mr. Clarke was not an author, and he was by much the most
interesting person of the whole. He had travelled, and, particularly,
he had travelled in Italy--then an aristocratic distinction; had a
small, but interesting, picture gallery; and, at this time, amused
himself by studying Greek, for which purpose he and myself met at
sunrise every morning through the summer, and read Æschylus together.
These meetings, at which we sometimes had the company of any stranger
who might happen to be an amateur in Greek, were pleasant enough to
my schoolboy vanity--placing me in the position of teacher and guide
to men old enough to be my grandfathers. But the dinner parties, at
which the literati sometimes assembled in force, were far from being
equally amusing. Mr. Roscoe[26] was simple and manly in his demeanour;
but there was the feebleness of a mere _belle-lettrist_, a mere man of
_virtù_, in the style of his sentiments on most subjects. Yet he was
a politician, and took an ardent interest in politics, and wrote upon
politics--all which are facts usually presuming some vigour of mind.
And he wrote, moreover, on the popular side, and with a boldness which,
in that day, when such politics were absolutely disreputable, seemed
undeniably to argue great moral courage. But these were accidents
arising out of his connexion with the Whig party, or (to speak more
accurately) with the _Opposition_ party in Parliament; by whom he was
greatly caressed. Mr. Fox, the Duchess of Devonshire, Mr. Sheridan,
and all the _powers_ on that side of the question, showed him the
most marked attention in a great variety of forms; and this it was,
not any native propensity for such speculations, which drove him into
pamphleteering upon political questions. Mr. Fox (himself the very
feeblest of party writers) was probably sincere in his admiration of
Mr. Roscoe's pamphlets; and did seriously think him, as I know that he
described him in private letters, an antagonist well matched against
Burke; and _that_ he afterwards became in form. The rest of the world
wondered at his presumption, or at his gross miscalculation of his
own peculiar powers. An eminent person, in after years (about 1815),
speaking to me of Mr. Roscoe's political writings, especially those
which had connected his name with Burke, declared that he always felt
of him in that relation not so much as of a feeble man, but absolutely
as of a _Sporus_ (that was his very expression), or a man emasculated.
Right or wrong in his views, he showed the most painful defect of good
sense and prudence in confronting his own understanding, so plain and
homely, with the Machiavelian Briareus of a hundred arms--the Titan
whom he found in Burke; all the advantages of a living antagonist over
a dead one could not compensate odds so fearful in original power.

It was a striking illustration of the impotence of mere literature
against natural power and mother wit that the only man who was
considered indispensable in these parties, for giving life and impulse
to their vivacity, was a tailor; and not, I was often assured, a
person deriving a designation from the craft of those whose labours
he supported as a capitalist, but one who drew his own honest daily
bread from his own honest needle, except when he laid it aside for the
benefit of drooping literati, who needed to be watered with his wit.
Wit, perhaps, in a proper sense, he had not--it was rather drollery,
and sometimes even buffoonery.

These, in the lamentable absence of the tailor, could be furnished of
an inferior quality by Mr. Shepherd,[27] who (as may be imagined from
this fact) had but little dignity in private life. I know not how far
he might alter in these respects; but certainly, at the time (1801-2),
he was decidedly, or could be, a buffoon, and seemed even ambitious
of the title, by courting notice for his grotesque manner and coarse
stories, more than was altogether compatible with the pretensions
of a scholar and a clergyman. I must have leave to think that such
a man could not have emerged from any great University, or from any
but a sectarian training. Indeed, about Poggio himself there were
circumstances which would have indisposed any regular clergyman of
the Church of England, or of the Scottish Kirk, to usher him into the
literature of his country. With what coarseness and low buffoonery
have I heard this Mr. Shepherd in those days run down the bishops then
upon the bench, but especially those of any public pretensions or
reputation, as Horsley and Porteus, and, in connexion with them, the
pious Mrs. Hannah More! Her he could not endure.

Of this gentleman, having said something disparaging, I am bound to go
on and add, that I believe him to have been at least a truly upright
man--talking often wildly, but incapable of doing a conscious wrong to
any man, be his party what it might; and, in the midst of fun or even
buffoonery, a real, and, upon occasion, a stern patriot, Mr. Canning
and others he opposed to the teeth upon the Liverpool hustings, and
would take no bribe, as others did, from literary feelings of sympathy,
or (which is so hard for an amiable mind to resist) from personal
applications of courtesy and respect. Amusing it is to look back upon
any political work of Mr. Shepherd's, as upon his "Tour to France,"
published in 1815, and to know that the pale pink of his Radicalism was
then accounted deep, deep scarlet.

Nothing can better serve to expound the general force of intellect
amongst the Liverpool coterie than the quality of their poetry, and the
general standard which they set up in poetry. Not that even in their
errors, as regarded poetry, they were of a magnitude to establish any
standard or authority in their own persons. Imitable or seducing there
could be nothing in persons who wrote verses occasionally, and as a
[Greek: parergon] or by-labour, and were themselves the most timid of
imitators. But to me, who, in that year, 1801, already knew of a grand
renovation of poetic power--of a new birth in poetry, interesting
not so much to England as to the human mind--it was secretly amusing
to contrast the little artificial usages of their petty traditional
knack with the natural forms of a divine art--the difference being
pretty much as between an American lake, Ontario, or Superior, and
a carp pond or a tench preserve. Mr. Roscoe had just about this
time published a translation from the _Balia_ of Luigi Tansillo--a
series of dullish lines, with the moral purpose of persuading young
women to suckle their own children. The brilliant young Duchess of
Devonshire, some half century ago, had, for a frolic--a great lady's
caprice--set a precedent in this way; against which, however, in that
rank, medical men know that there is a good deal to be said; and in
ranks more extensive than those of the Duchess it must be something of
an Irish bull to suppose any _general_ neglect of this duty, since,
upon so large a scale, whence could come the vicarious nurses? There
is, therefore, no great sense in the fundamental idea of the poem,
because the abuse denounced cannot be large enough; but the prefatory
sonnet, addressed to the translator's wife, as one at whose maternal
breast "six sons successive" had hung in infancy--this is about the
one sole bold, natural thought, or natural expression of feeling, to
which Mr. Roscoe had committed himself in verse. Everywhere else,
the most timid and blind servility to the narrowest of conventional
usages, conventional ways of viewing things, conventional forms of
expression, marks the style. For example, Italy is always _Italia_,
Scotland _Scotia_, France _Gallia_; so inveterately had the mind, in
this school of feeling, been trained, alike in the highest things and
in the lowest, to a horror of throwing itself boldly upon the great
_realities_ of life: even names must be fictions for _their_ taste. Yet
what comparison between "_France_, an Ode," and "_Gallia_, an Ode"?

Dr. Currie was so much occupied with his professional duties that of
him I saw but little. His edition of Burns was just then published (I
think in that very month), and in everybody's hands. At that time,
he was considered not unjust to the memory of the man, and (however
constitutionally phlegmatic, or with little enthusiasm, at least in
external show) not much below the mark in his appreciation of the
poet.[28]

So stood matters some twelve or fourteen years; after which period a
"craze" arose on the subject of Burns, which allowed no voice to be
heard but that of zealotry and violent partisanship. The first impulse
to this arose out of an oblique collision between Lord Jeffrey and
Mr. Wordsworth; the former having written a disparaging critique
upon Burns's pretensions--a little, perhaps, too much coloured by
the fastidiousness of long practice in the world, but, in the main,
speaking some plain truths on the quality of Burns's understanding, as
expressed in his epistolary compositions. Upon which, in his celebrated
letter to Mr. James Gray, the friend of Burns, himself a poet, and then
a master in the High School of Edinburgh, Mr. Wordsworth commented
with severity, proportioned rather to his personal resentments towards
Lord Jeffrey than to the quantity of wrong inflicted upon Burns.
Mr. Wordsworth's letter, in so far as it was a record of embittered
feeling, might have perished; but, as it happened to embody some
profound criticisms, applied to the art of biography, and especially
to the delicate task of following a man of original genius through his
personal infirmities or his constitutional aberrations--this fact,
and its relation to Burns and the author's name, have all combined to
embalm it.[29] Its momentary effect, in conjunction with Lord Jeffrey's
article, was to revive the interest (which for some time had languished
under the oppression of Sir Walter Scott and Lord Byron) in all that
related to Burns. Fresh Lives appeared in a continued succession,
until, upon the death of Lord Byron in 1824, Mr. Allan Cunningham, who
had personally known Burns, so far as a boy _could_ know a mature man,
gave a new impulse to the interest, by an impressive paper in which
he contrasted the circumstances of Burns's death with those of Lord
Byron's, and also the two funerals--both of which, one altogether,
and the other in part, Mr. Cunningham had personally witnessed. A
man of genius, like Mr. Cunningham, throws a new quality of interest
upon all which he touches; and, having since brought fresh research
and the illustrative power of the arts to bear upon the subject, and
all this having gone on concurrently with the great modern revolution
in literature--that is, the great extension of a _popular_ interest,
through the astonishing reductions of price--the result is, that Burns
has, at length, become a national, and, therefore, in a certain sense,
a privileged subject; which, in a perfect sense, he was _not_, until
the controversial management of his reputation had irritated the public
attention. Dr. Currie did not address the same alert condition of the
public feeling, nor, by many hundred degrees, so _diffused_ a condition
of any feeling which might imperfectly exist, as a man must consciously
address in these days, whether as the biographer or the critic of
Burns. The lower-toned enthusiasm of the public was not of a quality to
irritate any little enthusiasm which the worthy Doctor might have felt.
The public of that day felt with regard to Burns exactly as with regard
to Bloomfield--not that the quality of his poems was then the staple of
the interest, but the extraordinary fact that a ploughman or a lady's
shoemaker should have written any poems at all. The sole difference in
the two cases, as regarded by the public of that day, was that Burns's
case was terminated by a premature, and, for the public, a very sudden
death: this gave a personal interest to his case which was wanting in
the other; and a direct result of this was that his executors were able
to lay before the world a series of his letters recording his opinions
upon a considerable variety of authors, and his feelings under many
ordinary occasions of life.

Dr. Currie, therefore, if phlegmatic, as he certainly was, must be
looked upon as upon a level with the public of his own day--a public
how different, different by how many centuries, from the world of
this present 1837! One thing I remember which powerfully illustrates
the difference. Burns, as we all know, with his peculiarly wild
and almost ferocious spirit of independence, came a generation too
soon. In this day, he would have been forced to do that, clamorously
called upon to do that, and would have found his pecuniary interest
in doing that, which in his own generation merely to attempt doing
loaded him with the reproach of Jacobinism. It must be remembered that
the society of Liverpool wits on whom my retrospect is now glancing
were all Whigs--all, indeed, fraternizers with French Republicanism.
Yet so it was that--not once, not twice, but daily almost, in the
numerous conversations naturally elicited by this Liverpool monument
to Burns's memory--I heard every one, clerk or layman, heartily
agreeing to tax Burns with ingratitude and with pride falsely directed,
because he sate uneasily or restively under the bridle-hand of his
noble self-called "_patrons_." Aristocracy, then, the essential
spirit of aristocracy--this I found was not less erect and clamorous
amongst partisan democrats--democrats who were such merely in a party
sense of supporting his Majesty's Opposition against his Majesty's
Servants--than it was or could be among the most bigoted of the
professed feudal aristocrats. For my part, at this moment, when all
the world was reading Currie's monument to the memory of Burns and the
support of his family, I felt and avowed my feeling most loudly--that
Burns was wronged, was deeply, memorably wronged. A £10 bank note,
by way of subscription for a few copies of an early edition of his
poems--this is the outside that I could ever see proof given of Burns
having received anything in the way of _patronage_; and doubtless
this would have been gladly returned, but from the dire necessity of
dissembling.

Lord Glencairn is the "patron" for whom Burns appears to have felt the
most sincere respect. Yet even he--did he give him more than a seat at
his dinner table? Lord Buchan again, whose liberalities are by this
time pretty well appreciated in Scotland, exhorts Burns, in a tone
of one preaching upon a primary duty of life, to exemplary gratitude
towards a person who had given him absolutely nothing at all. The man
has not yet lived to whose happiness it was more essential that he
should live unencumbered by the sense of obligation; and, on the other
hand, the man has not lived upon whose independence as professing
benefactors so many people practised, or who found so many others ready
to ratify and give value to their pretences.[30] Him, whom beyond most
men nature had created with the necessity of conscious independence,
all men besieged with the assurance that he was, must be, ought to
be dependent; nay, that it was his primary duty to be grateful for
his dependence. I have not looked into any edition of Burns, except
once for a quotation, since this year 1801--when I read the whole of
Currie's edition, and had opportunities of meeting the editor--and once
subsequently, upon occasion of a fifth or supplementary volume being
published. I know not, therefore, how this matter has been managed
by succeeding editors, such as Allan Cunningham, far more capable of
understanding Burns's situation, from the previous struggles of their
own honourable lives, and Burns's feelings, from something of congenial
power.

I, in this year, 1801, when in the company of Dr. Currie, did not
forget, and, with some pride I say that I stood alone in remembering,
the very remarkable position of Burns: not merely that, with his
genius, and with the intellectual pretensions generally of his family,
he should have been called to a life of early labour, and of labour
unhappily not prosperous, but also that he, by accident about the
proudest of human spirits, should have been by accident summoned,
beyond all others, to eternal recognitions of some mysterious gratitude
which he owed to some mysterious patrons little and great, whilst yet,
of all men, perhaps, he reaped the least obvious or known benefit from
any patronage that has ever been put on record. Most men, if they reap
little from patronage, are liberated from the claims of patronage,
or, if they are summoned to a galling dependency, have at least the
fruits of their dependency. But it was this man's unhappy fate--with an
early and previous irritability on this very point--to find himself
saddled, by his literary correspondents, with all that was odious in
dependency, whilst he had every hardship to face that is most painful
in unbefriended poverty.

On this view of the case, I talked, then, being a schoolboy, with and
against the first editor of Burns:--I did not, and I do not, profess
to admire the letters (that is, the prose), all or any, of Burns. I
felt that they were liable to the charges of Lord Jeffrey, and to
others beside; that they do not even express the natural vigour of
Burns's mind, but are at once vulgar, tawdry, coarse, and commonplace;
neither was I a person to affect any profound sympathy with the general
character and temperament of Burns, which has often been described
as "of the earth, earthy"--unspiritual--animal--beyond those of most
men equally intellectual. But still I comprehended his situation; I
had for ever ringing in my ears, during that summer of 1801, those
groans which ascended to heaven from his over-burthened heart--those
harrowing words, "_To give him leave to toil_," which record almost a
reproach to the ordinances of God--and I felt that upon him, amongst
all the children of labour, the primal curse had fallen heaviest and
sunk deepest. Feelings such as these I had the courage to express: a
personal compliment, or so, I might now and then hear; but all were
against me on the _matter_. Dr. Currie said--"Poor Burns! such notions
had been his ruin"; Mr. Shepherd continued to draw from the subject
some scoff or growl at Mr. Pitt and the Excise; the laughing tailor
told us a good story of some proud beggar; Mr. Clarke proposed that I
should write a Greek inscription for a cenotaph which he was to erect
in his garden to the memory of Burns;--and so passed away the solitary
protestation on behalf of Burns's jacobinism, together with the wine
and the roses, and the sea-breezes of that same Everton, in that same
summer of 1801. Mr. Roscoe is dead, and has found time since then to
be half forgotten; Dr. Currie, the physician, has been found "unable
to heal himself"; Mr. Shepherd of Gatacre is a name and a shadow; Mr.
Clarke is a shadow without a name; the tailor, who set the table in a
roar, is dust and ashes; and three men at the most remain of all who
in those convivial meetings held it right to look down upon Burns as
upon one whose spirit was rebellious overmuch against the institutions
of man, and jacobinical in a sense which "men of property" and master
manufacturers will never brook, albeit democrats by profession.

It was, I think, in the month of August, but certainly in the summer
season, and certainly in the year 1807, that I first saw this
illustrious man. My knowledge of him as a man of most original genius
began about the year 1799. A little before that time Wordsworth had
published the first edition (in a single volume) of the "Lyrical
Ballads,"[33] and into this had been introduced Mr. Coleridge's poem
of the "Ancient Mariner," as the contribution of an anonymous friend.
It would be directing the reader's attention too much to myself if
I were to linger upon this, the greatest event in the unfolding of
my own mind. Let me say, in one word, that, at a period when neither
the one nor the other writer was valued by the public--both having
a long warfare to accomplish of contumely and ridicule before they
could rise into their present estimation--I found in these poems
"the ray of a new morning," and an absolute revelation of untrodden
worlds teeming with power and beauty as yet unsuspected amongst men. I
may here mention that, precisely at the same time, Professor Wilson,
entirely unconnected with myself, and not even known to me until ten
years later, received the same startling and profound impressions
from the same volume.[34] With feelings of reverential interest,
so early and so deep, pointing towards two contemporaries, it may
be supposed that I inquired eagerly after their names. But these
inquiries were self-baffled; the same deep feelings which prompted
my curiosity causing me to recoil from all casual opportunities of
pushing the inquiry, as too generally lying amongst those who gave
no sign of participating in my feelings; and, extravagant as this
may seem, I revolted with as much hatred from coupling my question
with any occasion of insult to the persons whom it respected, as a
primitive Christian from throwing frankincense upon the altars of
Cæsar, or a lover from giving up the name of his beloved to the coarse
license of a Bacchanalian party. It is laughable to record for how
long a period my curiosity in this particular was thus self-defeated.
Two years passed before I ascertained the two names. Mr. Wordsworth
published _his_ in the second and enlarged edition of the poems[35];
and for Mr. Coleridge's I was "indebted" to a private source; but I
discharged that debt ill, for I quarrelled with my informant for what
I considered his profane way of dealing with a subject so hallowed in
my own thoughts. After this I searched, east and west, north and south,
for all known works or fragments of the same authors. I had read,
therefore, as respects Mr. Coleridge, the Allegory which he contributed
to Mr. Southey's "Joan of Arc."[36] I had read his fine Ode entitled
"France,"[37] his Ode to the Duchess of Devonshire, and various
other contributions, more or less interesting, to the two volumes
of the "Anthology" published at Bristol, about 1799-1800, by Mr.
Southey[38]; and, finally, I had, of course, read the small volume of
poems published under his own name. These, however, as a juvenile and
immature collection, made expressly with a view to pecuniary profit,
and therefore courting expansion at any cost of critical discretion,
had in general greatly disappointed me.[39]

Meantime, it had crowned the interest which to me invested his name,
that about the year 1804 or 1805 I had been informed by a gentleman
from the English Lakes, who knew him as a neighbour, that he had for
some time applied his whole mind to metaphysics and psychology--which
happened to be my own absorbing pursuit. From 1803 to 1808, I was a
student at Oxford; and, on the first occasion when I could conveniently
have sought for a personal knowledge of one whom I contemplated with so
much admiration, I was met by a painful assurance that he had quitted
England, and was then residing at Malta, in the quality of secretary to
the Governor. I began to inquire about the best route to Malta; but,
as any route at that time promised an inside place in a French prison,
I reconciled myself to waiting; and at last, happening to visit the
Bristol Hotwells in the summer of 1807, I had the pleasure to hear
that Coleridge was not only once more upon English ground, but within
forty and odd miles of my own station. In that same hour I bent my
way to the south; and, before evening, reaching a ferry on the river
Bridgewater, at a village called, I think, Stogursey (_i.e._, Stoke de
Courcy, by way of distinction from some other Stoke), I crossed it, and
a few miles farther attained my object--viz., the little town of Nether
Stowey, amongst the Quantock Hills. Here I had been assured that I
should find Mr. Coleridge, at the house of his old friend Mr. Poole. On
presenting myself, however, to that gentleman, I found that Coleridge
was absent at Lord Egmont's, an elder brother (by the father's side)
of Mr. Perceval, the Prime Minister, assassinated five years later;
and, as it was doubtful whether he might not then be on the wing to
another friend's in the town of Bridgewater, I consented willingly,
until his motions should be ascertained, to stay a day or two with
this Mr. Poole--a man on his own account well deserving a separate
notice; for, as Coleridge afterwards remarked to me, he was almost
an ideal model for a useful member of Parliament.[40] I found him a
stout, plain-looking farmer, leading a bachelor life, in a rustic,
old-fashioned house; the house, however, upon further acquaintance,
proving to be amply furnished with modern luxuries, and especially with
a good library, superbly mounted in all departments bearing at all
upon political philosophy; and the farmer turning out a polished and
liberal Englishman, who had travelled extensively, and had so entirely
dedicated himself to the service of his humble fellow-countrymen--the
hewers of wood and drawers of water in this southern part of
Somersetshire--that for many miles round he was the general arbiter of
their disputes, the guide and counsellor of their difficulties; besides
being appointed executor and guardian to his children by every third
man who died in or about the town of Nether Stowey.

The first morning of my visit, Mr. Poole was so kind as to propose,
knowing my admiration of Wordsworth, that we should ride over to
Alfoxton[41]--a place of singular interest to myself, as having been
occupied in his unmarried days by that poet, during the minority of Mr.
St. Aubyn, its present youthful proprietor. At this delightful spot,
the ancient residence of an ancient English family, and surrounded by
those ferny Quantock Hills which are so beautifully glanced at in the
poem of "Ruth," Wordsworth, accompanied by his sister, had passed a
good deal of the interval between leaving the University (Cambridge)
and the period of his final settlement amongst his native lakes of
Westmoreland: some allowance, however, must be made--but how much I do
not accurately know--for a long residence in France, for a short one
in North Germany, for an intermitting one in London, and for a regular
domestication with his sister at Race Down in Dorsetshire.

Returning late from this interesting survey, we found ourselves
without company at dinner; and, being thus seated _tête-à-tête_,
Mr. Poole propounded the following question to me, which I mention
because it furnished me with the first hint of a singular infirmity
besetting Coleridge's mind:--"Pray, my young friend, did you ever
form any opinion, or, rather, did it ever happen to you to meet
with any rational opinion or conjecture of others, upon that most
revolting dogma of Pythagoras about beans? You know what I mean: that
monstrous doctrine in which he asserts that a man might as well, for
the wickedness of the thing, eat his own grandmother as meddle with
beans."

P.--"True: now, our dear excellent friend Coleridge, than whom God
never made a creature more divinely endowed, yet, strange it is to
say, sometimes steals from other people, just as you or I might do; I
beg your pardon--just as a poor creature like myself might do, that
sometimes have not wherewithal to make a figure from my own exchequer:
and the other day, at a dinner party, this question arising about
Pythagoras and his beans, Coleridge gave us an interpretation which,
from his manner, I suspect to have been not original. Think, therefore,
if you have anywhere read a plausible solution."

"I have: and it was a German author. This German, understand, is a poor
stick of a man, not to be named on the same day with Coleridge: so
that, if Coleridge should appear to have robbed him, be assured that he
has done the scamp too much honour."

P.--"Well: what says the German?"

"Why, you know the use made in Greece of beans in voting and balloting?
Well: the German says that Pythagoras speaks symbolically; meaning that
electioneering, or, more generally, all interference with political
intrigues, is fatal to a philosopher's pursuits and their appropriate
serenity. Therefore, says he, follower of mine, abstain from public
affairs as you would from parricide."

P.--"Well, then, Coleridge _has_ done the scamp too much honour: for,
by Jove, that is the very explanation he gave us!"

Here was a trait of Coleridge's mind, to be first made known to me by
his best friend, and first published to the world by me, the foremost
of his admirers! But both of us had sufficient reasons:--Mr. Poole knew
that, stumbled on by accident, such a discovery would be likely to
impress upon a man as yet unacquainted with Coleridge a most injurious
jealousy with regard to all he might write: whereas, frankly avowed
by one who knew him best, the fact was disarmed of its sting; since
it thus became evident that, where the case had been best known and
most investigated, it had not operated to his serious disadvantage. On
the same argument,--to forestall, that is to say, other discoverers,
who would make a more unfriendly use of the discovery,--and also as
matters of literary curiosity, I shall here point out a few others of
Coleridge's unacknowledged obligations, noticed by myself in a very
wide course of reading.[43]

1. The Hymn to Chamouni is an expansion of a short poem in stanzas,
upon the same subject, by Frederica Brun, a female poet of Germany,
previously known to the world under her maiden name of Münter. The
mere framework of the poem is exactly the same--an appeal to the most
impressive features of the regal mountain (Mont Blanc), adjuring them
to proclaim their author: the torrent, for instance, is required to say
by whom it had been arrested in its headlong raving, and stiffened, as
by the petrific touch of Death, into everlasting pillars of ice; and
the answer to these impassioned apostrophes is made by the same choral
burst of rapture. In mere logic, therefore, and even as to the choice
of circumstances, Coleridge's poem is a translation. On the other hand,
by a judicious amplification of some topics, and by its far deeper tone
of lyrical enthusiasm, the dry bones of the German outline have been
awakened by Coleridge into the fulness of life. It is not, therefore, a
paraphrase, but a re-cast of the original. And how was this calculated,
if frankly avowed, to do Coleridge any injury with the judicious?

2. A more singular case of Coleridge's infirmity is this:--In a very
noble passage of "France," a fine expression or two occur from "Samson
Agonistes." Now, to take a phrase or an inspiriting line from the great
fathers of poetry, even though no marks of quotation should be added,
carries with it no charge of plagiarism. Milton is justly presumed to
be as familiar to the ear as nature to the eye; and to steal from him
as impossible as to appropriate, or sequester to a private use, some
"bright particular star." And there is a good reason for rejecting the
typographical marks of quotation: they break the continuity of the
passion, by reminding the reader of a printed book; on which account
Milton himself (to give an instance) has not marked the sublime words,
"tormented all the air" as borrowed; nor has Wordsworth, in applying to
an unprincipled woman of commanding beauty the memorable expression "a
weed of glorious feature," thought it necessary to acknowledge it as
originally belonging to Spenser. Some dozens of similar cases might be
adduced from Milton. But Coleridge, when saying of republican France
that,

               "_Insupportably advancing_,
     Her arm made mockery of the warrior's tramp,"

not satisfied with omitting the marks of acknowledgment, thought fit
positively to deny that he was indebted to Milton. Yet who could
forget that semi-chorus in the "Samson" where the "bold Ascalonite" is
described as having "fled from his lion ramp"? Or who, that was not
in this point liable to some hallucination of judgment, would have
ventured on a public challenge (for virtually it was that) to produce
from the "Samson" words so impossible to be overlooked as those of
"insupportably advancing the foot"? The result was that one of the
critical journals placed the two passages in juxtaposition and left the
reader to his own conclusions with regard to the poet's veracity. But,
in this instance, it was common sense rather than veracity which the
facts impeach.

3. In the year 1810 I happened to be amusing myself by reading, in
their chronological order, the great classical circumnavigations of
the earth; and, coming to Shelvocke, I met with a passage to this
effect:--That Hatley, his second captain (_i.e._ lieutenant), being a
melancholy man, was possessed by a fancy that some long season of foul
weather, in the solitary sea which they were then traversing, was due
to an albatross which had steadily pursued the ship; upon which he shot
the bird, but without mending their condition. There at once I saw
the germ of the "Ancient Mariner"; and I put a question to Coleridge
accordingly. Could it have been imagined that he would see cause
utterly to disown so slight an obligation to Shelvocke? Wordsworth, a
man of stern veracity, on hearing of this, professed his inability to
understand Coleridge's meaning; the fact being notorious, as he told
me, that Coleridge had derived from the very passage I had cited the
original hint for the action of the poem; though it is very possible,
from something which Coleridge said on another occasion, that, before
meeting a fable in which to embody his ideas, he had meditated a poem
on delirium, confounding its own dream-scenery with external things,
and connected with the imagery of high latitudes.

4. All these cases amount to nothing at all as cases of plagiarism,
and for this reason expose the more conspicuously that obliquity of
feeling which could seek to decline the very slight acknowledgments
required. But now I come to a case of real and palpable plagiarism;
yet that, too, of a nature to be quite unaccountable in a man of
Coleridge's attainments. It is not very likely that this particular
case will soon be detected; but others will. Yet who knows? Eight
hundred or a thousand years hence, some reviewer may arise who having
read the "Biographia Literaria" of Coleridge, will afterwards read the
"Philosophical----"[44] of Schelling, the great Bavarian professor--a
man in some respects worthy to be Coleridge's assessor; and he will
then make a singular discovery. In the "Biographia Literaria" occurs
a dissertation upon the reciprocal relations of the _Esse_ and the
_Cogitare_,--that is, of the _objective_ and the _subjective_: and an
attempt is made, by inverting the postulates from which the argument
starts, to show how each might arise as a product, by an intelligible
genesis, from the other. It is a subject which, since the time of
Fichte, has much occupied the German metaphysicians; and many thousands
of essays have been written on it, or indirectly so, of which many
hundreds have been read by many tens of persons. Coleridge's essay,
in particular, is prefaced by a few words in which, aware of his
coincidence with Schelling, he declares his willingness to acknowledge
himself indebted to so great a man in any case where the truth would
allow him to do so; but, in this particular case, insisting on the
impossibility that he could have borrowed arguments which he had
first seen some years after he had thought out the whole hypothesis
_proprio marte_. After this, what was my astonishment to find that
the entire essay, from the first word to the last, is a _verbatim_
translation from Schelling, with no attempt in a single instance to
appropriate the paper by developing the arguments or by diversifying
the illustrations? Some other obligations to Schelling, of a slighter
kind, I have met with in the "Biographia Literaria"; but this was a
barefaced plagiarism, which could in prudence have been risked only
by relying too much upon the slight knowledge of German literature in
this country, and especially of that section of the German literature.
Had, then, Coleridge any need to borrow from Schelling? Did he borrow
_in forma pauperis_? Not at all: there lay the wonder. He spun daily,
and at all hours, for mere amusement of his own activities, and from
the loom of his own magical brain, theories more gorgeous by far, and
supported by a pomp and luxury of images such as neither Schelling--no,
nor any German that ever breathed, not John Paul--could have emulated
in his dreams. With the riches of El Dorado lying about him, he would
condescend to filch a handful of gold from any man whose purse he
fancied, and in fact reproduced in a new form, applying itself to
intellectual wealth, that maniacal propensity which is sometimes well
known to attack enormous proprietors and millionaires for acts of petty
larceny. The last Duke of Anc---- could not abstain from exercising his
furtive mania upon articles so humble as silver spoons; and it was the
nightly care of a pious daughter, watching over the aberrations of her
father, to have his pockets searched by a confidential valet, and the
claimants of the purloined articles traced out.

Many cases have crossed me in life of people, otherwise not wanting in
principle, who had habits, or at least hankerings, of the same kind.
And the phrenologists, I believe, are well acquainted with the case,
its signs, its progress, and its history. Dismissing, however, this
subject, which I have at all noticed only that I might anticipate,
and (in old English) that I might _prevent_, the uncandid interpreter
of its meaning, I will assert finally that, after having read for
thirty years in the same track as Coleridge--that track in which few
of any age will ever follow us, such as German metaphysicians, Latin
schoolmen, thaumaturgic Platonists, religious Mystics--and having thus
discovered a large variety of trivial thefts, I do, nevertheless,
most heartily believe him to have been as entirely original in all
his capital pretensions as any one man that ever has existed; as
Archimedes in ancient days, or as Shakspere in modern. Did the reader
ever see Milton's account of the rubbish contained in the Greek and
Latin Fathers?[45] Or did he ever read a statement of the monstrous
chaos with which an African Obeah man stuffs his enchanted scarecrows?
Or, take a more common illustration, did he ever amuse himself by
searching the pockets of a child--three years old, suppose--when
buried in slumber after a long summer's day of out-o'-doors intense
activity? I have done this; and, for the amusement of the child's
mother, have analyzed the contents, and drawn up a formal register
of the whole. Philosophy is puzzled, conjecture and hypothesis are
confounded, in the attempt to explain the law of selection which _can_
have presided in the child's labours; stones remarkable only for
weight, old rusty hinges, nails, crooked skewers stolen when the cook
had turned her back, rags, broken glass, tea-cups having the bottom
knocked out, and loads of similar jewels, were the prevailing articles
in this _procès-verbal_. Yet, doubtless, much labour had been incurred,
some sense of danger perhaps had been faced, and the anxieties of a
conscious robber endured, in order to amass this splendid treasure.
Such in value were the robberies of Coleridge; such their usefulness to
himself or anybody else; and such the circumstances of uneasiness under
which he had committed them. I return to my narrative.

Two or three days had slipped away in waiting for Coleridge's
re-appearance at Nether Stowey, when suddenly Lord Egmont called
upon Mr. Poole, with a present for Coleridge: it was a canister of
peculiarly fine snuff, which Coleridge now took profusely. Lord
Egmont, on this occasion, spoke of Coleridge in the terms of excessive
admiration, and urged Mr. Poole to put him upon undertaking some great
monumental work, that might furnish a sufficient arena for the display
of his various and rare accomplishments; for his multiform erudition
on the one hand, for his splendid power of theorizing and combining
large and remote notices of facts on the other. And he suggested,
judiciously enough, as one theme which offered a field at once large
enough and indefinite enough to suit a mind that could not show its
full compass of power unless upon very plastic materials--a History
of Christianity, in its progress and in its chief divarications into
Church and Sect, with a continual reference to the relations subsisting
between Christianity and the current philosophy; their occasional
connexions or approaches, and their constant mutual repulsions. "But,
at any rate, let him do something," said Lord Egmont; "for at present
he talks very much like an angel, and does nothing at all." Lord Egmont
I understood from everybody to be a truly good and benevolent man; and
on this occasion he spoke with an earnestness which agreed with my
previous impression. Coleridge, he said, was now in the prime of his
powers--uniting something of youthful vigour with sufficient experience
of life; having the benefit, beside, of vast meditation, and of reading
unusually discursive. No man had ever been better qualified to revive
the heroic period of literature in England, and to give a character of
weight to the philosophic erudition of the country upon the Continent.
"And what a pity," he added, "if this man were, after all, to vanish
like an apparition, and you, I, and a few others, who have witnessed
his grand _bravuras_ of display, were to have the usual fortune of
ghost-seers, in meeting no credit for any statements that we might
vouch on his behalf!"

On this occasion we learned, for the first time, that Lord Egmont's
carriage had, some days before, conveyed Coleridge to Bridgewater, with
a purpose of staying one single day at that place, and then returning
to Mr. Poole's. From the sort of laugh with which Lord Egmont taxed
his own simplicity, in having confided at all in the stability of any
Coleridgian plan, I now gathered that procrastination in excess was,
or had become, a marking feature in Coleridge's daily life. Nobody who
knew him ever thought of depending on any appointment he might make:
spite of his uniformly honourable intentions, nobody attached any
weight to his assurances _in re futura_: those who asked him to dinner
or any other party, as a matter of course, sent a carriage for him, and
went personally or by proxy to fetch him; and, as to letters, unless
the address were in some female hand that commanded his affectionate
esteem, he tossed them all into one general _dead-letter bureau_, and
rarely, I believe, opened them at all.[46] Bourrienne mentions a mode
of abridging the trouble attached to a very extensive correspondence,
by which infinite labour was saved to himself, and to Napoleon, when
First Consul. Nine out of ten letters, supposing them letters of
business with official applications of a special kind, he contends,
answer themselves: in other words, time alone must soon produce events
which virtually contain the answer. On this principle the letters were
opened periodically, after intervals, suppose, of six weeks; and, at
the end of that time, it was found that not many remained to require
any further more particular answer. Coleridge's plan, however, was
shorter: he opened none, I understood, and answered none. At least
such was his habit at that time. But, on that same day, all this,
which I heard now for the first time, and with much concern, was fully
explained; for already he was under the full dominion of opium, as he
himself revealed to me, and with a deep expression of horror at the
hideous bondage, in a private walk of some length which I took with him
about sunset.

Lord Egmont's information, and the knowledge now gained of Coleridge's
habits, making it very uncertain when I might see him in my present
hospitable quarters, I immediately took my leave of Mr. Poole, and went
over to Bridgewater. I had received directions for finding out the
house where Coleridge was visiting; and, in riding down a main street
of Bridgewater, I noticed a gateway corresponding to the description
given me. Under this was standing, and gazing about him, a man whom I
will describe. In height he might seem to be about five feet eight (he
was, in reality, about an inch and a-half taller, but his figure was
of an order which drowns the height); his person was broad and full,
and tended even to corpulence; his complexion was fair, though not
what painters technically style fair, because it was associated with
black hair; his eyes were large, and soft in their expression; and it
was from the peculiar appearance of haze or dreaminess which mixed
with their light that I recognised my object. This was Coleridge.[47]
I examined him steadfastly for a minute or more; and it struck me
that he saw neither myself nor any other object in the street. He was
in a deep reverie; for I had dismounted, made two or three trifling
arrangements at an inn-door, and advanced close to him, before he had
apparently become conscious of my presence. The sound of my voice,
announcing my own name, first awoke him; he started, and for a moment
seemed at a loss to understand my purpose or his own situation; for he
repeated rapidly a number of words which had no relation to either of
us. There was no _mauvaise honte_ in his manner, but simple perplexity,
and an apparent difficulty in recovering his position amongst daylight
realities. This little scene over, he received me with a kindness of
manner so marked that it might be called gracious. The hospitable
family with whom he was domesticated were distinguished for their
amiable manners and enlightened understandings: they were descendants
from Chubb, the philosophic writer, and bore the same name. For
Coleridge they all testified deep affection and esteem--sentiments
in which the whole town of Bridgewater seemed to share; for in the
evening, when the heat of the day had declined, I walked out with him;
and rarely, perhaps never, have I seen a person so much interrupted
in one hour's space as Coleridge, on this occasion, by the courteous
attentions of young and old.

All the people of station and weight in the place, and apparently all
the ladies, were abroad to enjoy the lovely summer evening; and not a
party passed without some mark of smiling recognition, and the majority
stopping to make personal inquiries about his health, and to express
their anxiety that he should make a lengthened stay amongst them.
Certain I am, from the lively esteem expressed towards Coleridge at
this time by the people of Bridgewater, that a very large subscription
might, in that town, have been raised to support him amongst them, in
the character of a lecturer, or philosophical professor. Especially I
remarked that the young men of the place manifested the most liberal
interest in all that concerned him; and I can add my attestation
to that of Mr. Coleridge himself, when describing an evening spent
amongst the enlightened tradesmen of Birmingham, that nowhere is
more unaffected good sense exhibited, and particularly nowhere more
elasticity and _freshness_ of mind, than in the conversation of
the reading men in manufacturing towns. In Kendal, especially, in
Bridgewater, and in Manchester, I have witnessed more interesting
conversations, as much information, and more natural eloquence in
conveying it, than usually in literary cities, or in places professedly
learned. One reason for this is that in trading towns the time is more
happily distributed; the day given to business and active duties--the
evening to relaxation; on which account, books, conversation, and
literary leisure are more cordially enjoyed: the same satiation never
can take place which too frequently deadens the genial enjoyment of
those who have a surfeit of books and a monotony of leisure. Another
reason is that more simplicity of manner may be expected, and more
natural picturesqueness of conversation, more open expression of
character, in places where people have no previous name to support. Men
in trading towns are not afraid to open their lips for fear they should
disappoint your expectations, nor do they strain for showy sentiments
that they may meet them. But, elsewhere, many are the men who stand
in awe of their own reputation: not a word which is unstudied, not
a movement in the spirit of natural freedom, dare they give way to,
because it might happen that on review something would be seen to
retract or to qualify--something not properly planed and chiselled to
build into the general architecture of an artificial reputation. But to
return:--

Coleridge led me to a drawing-room, rang the bell for refreshments,
and omitted no point of a courteous reception. He told me that there
would be a very large dinner party on that day, which, perhaps, might
be disagreeable to a perfect stranger; but, if not, he could assure
me of a most hospitable welcome from the family. I was too anxious to
see him under all aspects to think of declining this invitation. That
point being settled, Coleridge, like some great river, the Orellana,
or the St. Lawrence, that, having been checked and fretted by rocks
or thwarting islands, suddenly recovers its volume of waters and its
mighty music, swept at once, as if returning to his natural business,
into a continuous strain of eloquent dissertation, certainly the most
novel, the most finely illustrated, and traversing the most spacious
fields of thought by transitions the most just and logical, that it
was possible to conceive. What I mean by saying that his transitions
were "just" is by way of contradistinction to that mode of conversation
which courts variety through links of _verbal_ connexions. Coleridge,
to many people, and often I have heard the complaint, seemed to wander;
and he seemed then to wander the most when, in fact, his resistance to
the wandering instinct was greatest--viz., when the compass and huge
circuit by which his illustrations moved travelled farthest into remote
regions before they began to revolve. Long before this coming round
commenced most people had lost him, and naturally enough supposed that
he had lost himself. They continued to admire the separate beauty of
the thoughts, but did not see their relations to the dominant theme.
Had the conversation been thrown upon paper, it might have been easy
to trace the continuity of the links; just as in Bishop Berkeley's
"Siris,"[48] from a pedestal so low and abject, so culinary, as Tar
Water, the method of preparing it, and its medicinal effects, the
dissertation ascends, like Jacob's ladder, by just gradations, into the
Heaven of Heavens and the thrones of the Trinity. But Heaven is there
connected with earth by the Homeric chain of gold; and, being subject
to steady examination, it is easy to trace the links; whereas, in
conversation, the loss of a single word may cause the whole cohesion to
disappear from view. However, I can assert, upon my long and intimate
knowledge of Coleridge's mind, that logic the most severe was as
inalienable from his modes of thinking as grammar from his language.

On the present occasion, the original theme, started by myself, was
Hartley and the Hartleian theory. I had carried as a little present to
Coleridge a scarce Latin pamphlet, "De Ideis," written by Hartley about
1746,--that is, about three years earlier than the publication of his
great work. He had also preluded to this great work in a little English
medical tract upon Joanna Stephens's medicine for the stone; for indeed
Hartley was the person upon whose evidence the House of Commons had
mainly relied in giving to that same Joanna a reward of £5000 for her
idle medicines--an application of public money not without its use, in
so far as it engaged men by selfish motives to cultivate the public
service, and to attempt public problems of very difficult solution; but
else, in that particular instance, perfectly idle, as the groans of
three generations since Joanna's era have too feelingly established. It
is known to most literary people that Coleridge was, in early life, so
passionate an admirer of the Hartleian philosophy that "Hartley" was
the sole baptismal name which he gave to his eldest child; and in an
early poem, entitled "Religious Musings," he has characterized Hartley
as

But at present (August 1807) all this was a forgotten thing. Coleridge
was so profoundly ashamed of the shallow Unitarianism of Hartley, and
so disgusted to think that he could at any time have countenanced that
creed, that he would scarcely allow to Hartley the reverence which is
undoubtedly his due; for I must contend that, waiving all question of
the extent to which Hartley would have pushed it (as though the law of
association accounted not only for our complex pleasures and pains, but
also might be made to explain the act of ratiocination),--waiving also
the physical substratum of nervous vibrations and miniature vibrations
to which he has chosen to marry his theory of association;--all this
apart, I must contend that the "Essay on Man, his Frame, his Duty,
and his Expectations" stands forward as a specimen almost unique
of elaborate theorizing, and a monument of absolute beauty in the
impression left of its architectural grace. In this respect it has, to
my mind, the spotless beauty and the ideal proportions of some Grecian
statue. However, I confess that, being myself, from my earliest years,
a reverential believer in the doctrine of the Trinity, simply because I
never attempted to bring all things within the mechanic understanding,
and because, like Sir Thomas, Browne, my mind almost demanded mysteries
in so mysterious a system of relations as those which connect us with
another world, and also because the farther my understanding opened the
more I perceived of dim analogies to strengthen my creed, and because
nature herself, mere physical nature, has mysteries no less profound;
for these, and for many other "_becauses_," I could not reconcile with
my general reverence for Mr. Coleridge the fact, so often reported to
me, that he was a Unitarian. But, said some Bristol people to me, not
only is he a Unitarian--he is also a Socinian. In that case, I replied,
I cannot hold him a Christian. I am a liberal man, and have no bigotry
or hostile feelings towards a Socinian; but I can never think that man
a Christian who has blotted out of his scheme the very powers by which
only the great offices and functions of Christianity can be sustained;
neither can I think that any man, though he make himself a marvellously
clever disputant, ever could tower upwards into a very great
philosopher unless he should begin or should end with Christianity.
Kant is a dubious exception. Not that I mean to question his august
pretensions, so far as they went, and in his proper line. Within his
own circle none durst tread but he. But that circle was limited. He
was called by one who weighed him well, the _alles-zermalmender_, the
world-shattering Kant. He could destroy--his intellect was essentially
destructive. He was the Gog and he was the Magog of Hunnish desolation
to the existing schemes of Philosophy. He probed them; he showed the
vanity of vanities which besieged their foundations--the rottenness
below, the hollowness above. But he had no instincts of creation or
restoration within his Apollyon mind; for he had no love, no faith, no
self-distrust, no humility, no childlike docility; all which qualities
belonged essentially to Coleridge's mind, and waited only for manhood
and for sorrow to bring them forward.

Who can read without indignation of Kant that, at his own table, in
social sincerity and confidential talk, let him say what he would
in his books, he exulted in the prospect of absolute and ultimate
annihilation; that he planted his glory in the grave, and was
ambitious of rotting for ever? The King of Prussia, though a personal
friend of Kant's, found himself obliged to level his state thunders
at some of his doctrines, and terrified him in his advance; else I
am persuaded that Kant would have formally delivered Atheism from
the professor's chair, and would have enthroned the horrid Ghoulish
creed (which privately he professed) in the University of Königsberg.
It required the artillery of a great king to make him pause: his
menacing or warning letter to Kant is extant. The general notion
is, that the royal logic applied so austerely to the public conduct
of Kant in his professor's chair was of that kind which rests its
strength "upon thirty legions." My own belief is that the king had
private information of Kant's ultimate tendencies as revealed in his
table-talk. The fact is that, as the stomach has been known, by means
of its own potent acid secretion, to attack not only whatsoever alien
body is introduced within it, but also (as John Hunter first showed)
sometimes to attack itself and its own organic structure, so, and with
the same preternatural extension of instinct, did Kant carry forward
his destroying functions, until he turned them upon his own hopes and
the pledges of his own superiority to the dog, the ape, the worm. But
"_exoriare aliquis_"--and some philosopher, I am persuaded, _will_
arise; and "one sling of some victorious arm" ("Paradise Lost," B. x.)
will yet destroy the destroyer, in so far as he has applied himself
to the destruction of Christian hope. For my faith is that, though a
great man may, by a rare possibility, be an infidel, an intellect of
the highest order must build upon Christianity. A very clever architect
may choose to show his power by building with insufficient materials;
but the supreme architect must require the very best, because the
perfection of the forms cannot be shown but in the perfection of the
matter.

On these accounts I took the liberty of doubting, as often as I heard
the reports I have mentioned of Coleridge; and I now found that he
disowned most solemnly (and I may say penitentially) whatever had been
true in these reports. Coleridge told me that it had cost him a painful
effort, but not a moment's hesitation, to abjure his Unitarianism, from
the circumstance that he had amongst the Unitarians many friends, to
some of whom he was greatly indebted for great kindness. In particular,
he mentioned Mr. Estlin of Bristol, a distinguished Dissenting
clergyman, as one whom it grieved him to grieve. But he would not
dissemble his altered views. I will add, at the risk of appearing to
dwell too long on religious topics, that, on this my first introduction
to Coleridge, he reverted with strong compunction to a sentiment which
he had expressed in earlier days upon prayer. In one of his youthful
poems, speaking of God, he had said--

     "Of whose omniscient and all-spreading love
     Aught to implore were impotence of mind."

This sentiment he now so utterly condemned that, on the contrary, he
told me, as his own peculiar opinion, that the act of praying was the
very highest energy of which the human heart was capable; praying, that
is, with the total concentration of the faculties; and the great mass
of worldly men, and of learned men, he pronounced absolutely incapable
of prayer.

For about three hours he had continued to talk, and in the course
of this performance he had delivered many most striking aphorisms,
embalming more weight of truth, and separately more deserving to be
themselves embalmed, than would easily be found in a month's course
of select reading. In the midst of our conversation, if that can be
called conversation which I so seldom sought to interrupt, and which
did not often leave openings for contribution, the door opened,
and a lady entered. She was in person full and rather below the
common height; whilst her face showed to my eye some prettiness of
rather a commonplace order. Coleridge paused upon her entrance; his
features, however, announced no particular complacency, and did not
relax into a smile. In a frigid tone he said, whilst turning to me,
"Mrs. Coleridge"; in some slight way he then presented me to her: I
bowed; and the lady almost immediately retired. From this short but
ungenial scene, I gathered, what I afterward learned redundantly, that
Coleridge's marriage had not been a very happy one. But let not the
reader misunderstand me. Never was there a baser insinuation, viler in
the motive, or more ignoble in the manner, than that passage in some
lampoon of Lord Byron's, where, by way of vengeance on Mr. Southey (who
was the sole delinquent), he described both him and Coleridge as having
married "two milliners from Bath." Everybody knows what is _meant_
to be conveyed in that expression, though it would be hard, indeed,
if, even at Bath, there should be any class under such a fatal curse,
condemned so irretrievably, and so hopelessly prejudged, that ignominy
must, at any rate, attach, in virtue of a mere name or designation, to
the mode by which they gained their daily bread, or possibly supported
the declining years of a parent. However, in this case, the whole
sting of the libel was a pure falsehood of Lord Byron's. Bath was
not the native city, nor at any time the residence, of the ladies in
question, but Bristol. As to the other word, "_milliners_," that is
not worth inquiring about. Whether they, or any one of their family,
ever _did_ exercise this profession, I do not know; they were, at all
events, too young, when removed by marriage from Bristol, to have
been much tainted by the worldly feelings which may beset such a mode
of life. But, what is more to the purpose, I heard, at this time,
in Bristol, from Mr. Cottle, the author, a man of high principle,
as also from his accomplished sisters,--from the ladies, again, who
had succeeded Mrs. Hannah More in her school, and who enjoyed her
entire confidence,--that the whole family of four or five sisters had
maintained an irreproachable character, though naturally exposed, by
their personal attractions, to some peril, and to the malevolence of
envy. This declaration, which I could strengthen by other testimony
equally disinterested, if it were at all necessary, I owe to truth; and
I must also add, upon a knowledge more personal, that Mrs. Coleridge
was, in all circumstances of her married life, a virtuous wife and a
conscientious mother; and, as a mother, she showed at times a most
meritorious energy. In particular, I remember that, wishing her
daughter to acquire the Italian language, and having in her retirement
at Keswick no means of obtaining a master, she set to work resolutely,
under Mr. Southey's guidance, to learn the language herself, at a time
of life when such attainments are not made with ease or pleasure. She
became mistress of the language in a very respectable extent, and then
communicated her new accomplishment to her most interesting daughter.

I go on, therefore, to say, that Coleridge afterwards made me, as
doubtless some others, a confidant in this particular. What he had
to complain of was simply incompatibility of temper and disposition.
Wanting all cordial admiration, or indeed comprehension, of her
husband's intellectual powers, Mrs. Coleridge wanted the original basis
for affectionate patience and candour. Hearing from everybody that
Coleridge was a man of most extraordinary endowments, and attaching
little weight, perhaps, to the distinction between popular talents
and such as by their very nature are doomed to a slower progress in
the public esteem, she naturally looked to see, at least, an ordinary
measure of worldly consequence attend upon their exercise. Now, had
Coleridge been as persevering and punctual as the great mass of
professional men, and had he given no reason to throw the _onus_ of
the different result upon his own different habits, in that case this
result might, possibly and eventually, have been set down to the
peculiar constitution of his powers, and their essential mal-adaptation
to the English market. But, this trial having never fairly been made,
it was natural to impute his non-success exclusively to his own
irregular application, and to his carelessness in forming judicious
connexions. In circumstances such as these, however, no matter how
caused or how palliated, was laid a sure ground of discontent and
fretfulness in any woman's mind, not unusually indulgent or unusually
magnanimous. Coleridge, besides, assured me that his marriage was not
his own deliberate act, but was in a manner forced upon his sense of
honour by the scrupulous Southey, who insisted that he had gone too
far in his attentions to Miss Fricker for any honourable retreat. On
the other hand, a neutral spectator of the parties protested to me,
that, if ever in his life he had seen a man under deep fascination, and
what he would have called desperately in love, Coleridge, in relation
to Miss F., was that man. Be that as it might, circumstances occurred
soon after the marriage which placed all the parties in a trying
situation for their candour and good temper. I had a full outline of
the situation from two of those who were chiefly interested, and a
partial one from a third: nor can it be denied that all the parties
offended in point of prudence. A young lady became a neighbour, and
a daily companion of Coleridge's walks, whom I will not describe
more particularly than by saying that intellectually she was very
much superior to Mrs. Coleridge. That superiority alone, when made
conspicuous by its effects in winning Coleridge's regard and society,
could not but be deeply mortifying to a young wife. However, it was
moderated to her feelings by two considerations:--1. That the young
lady was much too kind-hearted to have designed any annoyance in this
triumph, or to express any exultation; 2. That no shadow of suspicion
settled upon the moral conduct or motives of either party: the young
lady was always attended by her brother; she had no personal charms;
and it was manifest that mere intellectual sympathies, in reference
to literature and natural scenery, had associated them in their daily
walks.

Still, it is a bitter trial to a young married woman to sustain any
sort of competition with a female of her own age for any part of her
husband's regard, or any share of his company. Mrs. Coleridge, not
having the same relish for long walks or rural scenery, and their
residence being, at this time, in a very sequestered village, was
condemned to a daily renewal of this trial.[49] Accidents of another
kind embittered it still further: often it would happen that the
walking party returned drenched with rain; in which case, the young
lady, with a laughing gaiety, and evidently unconscious of any liberty
that she was taking, or any wound that she was inflicting, would run
up to Mrs. Coleridge's wardrobe, array herself, without leave asked,
in Mrs. Coleridge's dresses, and make herself merry with her own
unceremoniousness and Mrs. Coleridge's gravity. In all this, she took
no liberty that she would not most readily have granted in return;
she confided too unthinkingly in what she regarded as the natural
privileges of friendship; and as little thought that she had been
receiving or exacting a favour, as, under an exchange of their relative
positions, she would have claimed to confer one. But Mrs. Coleridge
viewed her freedoms with a far different eye: she felt herself no
longer the entire mistress of her own house; she held a divided
empire; and it barbed the arrow to her womanly feelings that Coleridge
treated any sallies of resentment which might sometimes escape her as
narrow-mindedness; whilst, on the other hand, her own female servant,
and others in the same rank of life, began to drop expressions which
alternately implied pity for her as an injured woman, or contempt for
her as a very tame one.

The reader will easily apprehend the situation, and the unfortunate
results which it boded to the harmony of a young married couple,
without further illustration. Whether Coleridge would not, under
any circumstances, have become indifferent to a wife not eminently
capable of enlightened sympathy with his own ruling pursuits, I do not
undertake to pronounce. My own impression is, that neither Coleridge
nor Lord Byron could have failed, eventually, to quarrel with _any_
wife, though a Pandora sent down from heaven to bless him. But,
doubtless, this consummation must have been hastened by a situation
which exposed Mrs. Coleridge to an invidious comparison with a more
intellectual person; as, on the other hand, it was most unfortunate
for Coleridge himself to be continually compared with one so ideally
correct and regular in his habits as Mr. Southey. Thus was their
domestic peace prematurely soured: embarrassments of a pecuniary nature
would be likely to demand continual sacrifices; no depth of affection
existing, these would create disgust or dissension; and at length
each would believe that their union had originated in circumstances
overruling their own deliberate choice.

The gloom, however, and the weight of dejection which sat upon
Coleridge's countenance and deportment at this time could not be
accounted for by a disappointment (if such it were) to which time
must, long ago, have reconciled him. Mrs. Coleridge, if not turning
to him the more amiable aspects of her character, was at any rate a
respectable partner. And the season of youth was now passed. They had
been married about ten years; had had four children, of whom three
survived; and the interests of a father were now replacing those of a
husband. Yet never had I beheld so profound an expression of cheerless
despondency. And the restless activity of Coleridge's mind, in chasing
abstract truths, and burying himself in the dark places of human
speculation, seemed to me, in a great measure, an attempt to escape
out of his own personal wretchedness. I was right. In this instance,
at least, I had hit the mark; and Coleridge bore witness himself at an
after period to the truth of my divination by some impressive verses.
At dinner, when a very numerous party had assembled, he knew that he
was expected to talk, and exerted himself to meet the expectation. But
he was evidently struggling with gloomy thoughts that prompted him to
silence, and perhaps to solitude: he talked with effort, and passively
resigned himself to the repeated misrepresentations of several amongst
his hearers. The subject chiefly discussed was Arthur Young, not for
his Rural Economy, but for his Politics.[50] It must be to this period
of Coleridge's life that Wordsworth refers in those exquisite "Lines
written in my pocket copy of the 'Castle of Indolence.'" The passage
which I mean comes after a description of Coleridge's countenance, and
begins in some such terms as these:--

     "A piteous sight it was to see this man,
     When he came back to us, a wither'd flow'r," &c.

Withered he was, indeed, and to all appearance blighted. At night he
entered into a spontaneous explanation of this unhappy overclouding
of his life, on occasion of my saying accidentally that a toothache
had obliged me to take a few drops of laudanum. At what time or on
what motive he had commenced the use of opium, he did not say; but the
peculiar emphasis of horror with which he warned me against forming a
habit of the same kind impressed upon my mind a feeling that he never
hoped to liberate himself from the bondage. My belief is that he never
_did_. About ten o'clock at night I took leave of him; and, feeling
that I could not easily go to sleep after the excitement of the day,
and fresh from the sad spectacle of powers so majestic already besieged
by decay, I determined to return to Bristol through the coolness of
the night. The roads, though, in fact, a section of the great highway
between seaports so turbulent as Bristol and Plymouth, were as quiet
as garden-walks. Once only I passed through the expiring fires of a
village fair or wake: that interruption excepted, through the whole
stretch of forty miles from Bridgewater to the Hot-wells, I saw no
living creature but a surly dog, who followed me for a mile along a
park-wall, and a man, who was moving about in the half-way town of
Cross. The turnpike-gates were all opened by a mechanical contrivance
from a bedroom window; I seemed to myself in solitary possession of the
whole sleeping country. The summer night was divinely calm; no sound,
except once or twice the cry of a child as I was passing the windows of
cottages, ever broke upon the utter silence; and all things conspired
to throw back my thoughts upon that extraordinary man whom I had just
quitted.

The fine saying of Addison is familiar to most readers--that Babylon
in ruins is not so affecting a spectacle, or so solemn, as a human
mind overthrown by lunacy. How much more awful, then, when a mind
so regal as that of Coleridge is overthrown, or threatened with
overthrow, not by a visitation of Providence, but by the treachery of
its own will, and by the conspiracy, as it were, of himself against
himself! Was it possible that this ruin had been caused or hurried
forward by the dismal degradations of pecuniary difficulties? That
was worth inquiring. I will here mention briefly that I _did_ inquire
two days after; and, in consequence of what I heard, I contrived that
a particular service should be rendered to Mr. Coleridge, a week
after, through the hands of Mr. Cottle of Bristol, which might have
the effect of liberating his mind from anxiety for a year or two, and
thus rendering his great powers disposable to their natural uses. That
service was accepted by Coleridge.[51] To save him any feelings of
distress, all names were concealed; but, in a letter written by him
about fifteen years after that time, I found that he had become aware
of all the circumstances, perhaps through some indiscretion of Mr.
Cottle's. A more important question I never ascertained, viz. whether
this service had the effect of seriously lightening his mind. For some
succeeding years, he did certainly appear to me released from that load
of despondency which oppressed him on my first introduction. Grave,
indeed, he continued to be, and at times absorbed in gloom; nor did I
ever see him in a state of perfectly natural cheerfulness. But, as he
strove in vain, for many years, to wean himself from his captivity to
opium, a healthy state of spirits could not be much expected. Perhaps,
indeed, where the liver and other organs had, for so large a period
in life, been subject to a continual morbid stimulation, it might be
impossible for the system ever to recover a natural action. Torpor,
I suppose, must result from continued artificial excitement; and,
perhaps, upon a scale of corresponding duration. Life, in such a case,
may not offer a field of sufficient extent for unthreading the fatal
links that have been wound about the machinery of health, and have
crippled its natural play.

Meantime--to resume the thread of my wandering narrative--on this
serene summer night of 1807, as I moved slowly along, with my eyes
continually settling upon the northern constellations, which, like
all the fixed stars, by their immeasurable and almost spiritual
remoteness from human affairs, naturally throw the thoughts upon the
perishableness of our earthly troubles, in contrast with their own
utter peace and solemnity--I reverted, at intervals, to all I had ever
heard of Coleridge, and strove to weave it into some continuous sketch
of his life. I hardly remember how much I then knew; I know but little
now: that little I will here jot down upon paper.

Samuel Taylor Coleridge was the son of a learned clergyman--the vicar
of Ottery St. Mary, in the southern quarter of Devonshire.[52] It is
painful to mention that he was almost an object of persecution to his
mother; why, I could never learn. His father was described to me, by
Coleridge himself, as a sort of Parson Adams, being distinguished
by his erudition, his inexperience of the world, and his guileless
simplicity. I once purchased in London, and, I suppose, still possess,
two elementary books on the Latin language by this reverend gentleman;
one of them, as I found, making somewhat higher pretensions than a
common school grammar.[53] In particular, an attempt is made to
reform the theory of the cases; and it gives a pleasant specimen of
the rustic scholar's _naïveté_, that he seriously proposes to banish
such vexatious terms as the _accusative_; and, by way of simplifying
the matter to tender minds, that we should call it, in all time to
come, the "_quale-quare-quidditive_" case, upon what incomprehensible
principle I never could fathom. He used regularly to delight his
village flock, on Sundays, with Hebrew quotations in his sermons, which
he always introduced as the "immediate language of the Holy Ghost."
This proved unfortunate to his successor: he also was a learned man,
and his parishioners admitted it, but generally with a sigh for past
times, and a sorrowful complaint that he was still far below Parson
Coleridge--for that _he_ never gave them any "immediate language
of the Holy Ghost." I presume that, like the reverend gentleman so
pleasantly sketched in "St. Ronan's Well," Mr. Coleridge, who resembled
that person in his oriental learning, in his absence of mind, and in
his simplicity, must also have resembled him in shortsightedness,
of which his son used to relate this ludicrous instance. Dining in
a large party, one day, the modest divine was suddenly shocked by
perceiving some part, as he conceived, of his own snowy shirt emerging
from a part of his habiliments, which we will suppose to have been
his waistcoat. It was _not_ that; but for decorum we will so call
it. The stray portion of his own supposed tunic was admonished of
its errors by a forcible thrust back into its proper home; but still
another _limbus_ persisted to emerge, or seemed to persist, and still
another, until the learned gentleman absolutely perspired with the
labour of re-establishing order. And, after all, he saw with anguish
that some arrears of the snowy indecorum still remained to reduce
into obedience. To this remnant of rebellion he was proceeding to
apply himself--strangely confounded, however, at the obstinacy of the
insurrection--when, the mistress of the house rising to lead away the
ladies from the table, and all parties naturally rising with her, it
became suddenly apparent to every eye that the worthy Orientalist had
been most laboriously stowing away into the capacious receptacles of
his own habiliments--under the delusion that it was his own shirt--the
snowy folds of a lady's gown, belonging to his next neighbour; and so
voluminously that a very small portion of it, indeed, remained for the
lady's own use; the natural consequence of which was, of course, that
the lady appeared inextricably yoked to the learned theologian, and
could not in any way effect her release, until after certain operations
upon the vicar's dress, and a continued refunding and rolling out of
snowy mazes upon snowy mazes, in quantities which at length proved too
much for the gravity of the company. Inextinguishable laughter arose
from all parties, except the erring and unhappy doctor, who, in dire
perplexity, continued still refunding with all his might--perspiring
and refunding--until he had paid up the last arrears of his long debt,
and thus put an end to a case of distress more memorable to himself and
his parishioners than any "_quale-quare-quidditive_" case that probably
had ever perplexed his learning.

In his childish days, and when he had become an orphan, Coleridge was
removed to the heart of London, and placed on the great foundation
of Christ's Hospital.[54] He there found himself associated, as a
school-fellow, with several boys destined to distinction in after
life; particularly the brilliant Leigh Hunt, and more closely with one
who, if not endowed with powers equally large and comprehensive as his
own, had, however, genius not less original or exquisite--viz. the
inimitable Charles Lamb. But, in learning, Coleridge outstripped all
competitors, and rose to be the captain of the school. It is, indeed,
a memorable fact to be recorded of a boy, that, before completing his
fifteenth year, he had translated the Greek Hymns of Synesius into
English Anacreontic verse. This was not a school task, but a labour of
love and choice. Before leaving school, Coleridge had an opportunity
of reading the sonnets of Bowles, which so powerfully impressed his
poetic sensibility that he made forty transcripts of them with his own
pen, by way of presents to youthful friends. From Christ's Hospital,
by the privilege of his station at school, he was transferred to Jesus
College, Cambridge.[55] It was here, no doubt, that his acquaintance
began with the philosophic system of Hartley, for that eminent person
had been a Jesus man. Frend also, the mathematician, of heretical
memory (he was judicially tried, and expelled from his fellowship, on
some issue connected with the doctrine of the Trinity), belonged to
that college, and was probably contemporary with Coleridge.[56] What
accident, or imprudence, carried him away from Cambridge before he had
completed the usual period of study, I never heard. He had certainly
won some distinction as a scholar, having obtained the prize for a
Greek ode in Sapphic metre, of which the sentiments (as he observes
himself) were better than the Greek. Porson was accustomed, meanly
enough, to ridicule the Greek _lexis_ of this ode; which was to break
a fly upon the wheel. The ode was clever enough for a boy; but to such
skill in Greek as could have enabled him to compose with critical
accuracy Coleridge never made pretensions.

The incidents of Coleridge's life about this period, and some account
of a heavy disappointment in love, which probably it was that
carried him away from Cambridge, are to be found embodied (with what
modifications I know not) in the novel of "Edmund Oliver," written by
Charles Lloyd. It is well known that, in a frenzy of unhappy feeling
at the rejection he met with from the lady of his choice, Coleridge
enlisted as a private into a dragoon regiment.[57] He fell off his
horse on several occasions, but perhaps not more than raw recruits are
apt to do when first put under the riding-master. But Coleridge was
naturally ill framed for a good horseman.

He is also represented in "Edmund Oliver" as having found peculiar
difficulty or annoyance in grooming his horse. But the most romantic
incident in that scene of his life was in the circumstances of his
discharge. It is said (but I vouch for no part of the story) that
Coleridge, as a private, mounted guard at the door of a room in
which his officers were giving a ball. Two of them had a dispute upon
some Greek word or passage when close to Coleridge's station. He
interposed his authentic decision of the case. The officers stared as
though one of their own horses had sung "Rule Britannia"; questioned
him; heard his story; pitied his misfortune; and finally subscribed
to purchase his discharge. So the story has been told; and also
otherwise.[58] Not very long after this, Coleridge became acquainted
with the two celebrated Wedgwoods of Etruria, both of whom, admiring
his fine powers, subscribed to send him into North Germany, where,
at the University of Göttingen, he completed his education according
to his own scheme. The most celebrated professor whose lectures he
attended was the far-famed Blumenbach, of whom he continued to speak
through life with almost filial reverence. Returning to England, he
attended Mr. Thomas Wedgwood, as a friend, throughout the afflicting
and anomalous illness which brought him to the grave. It was supposed
by medical men that the cause of Mr. Wedgwood's continued misery was a
stricture of the colon. The external symptoms were torpor and morbid
irritability, together with everlasting restlessness. By way of some
relief to this latter symptom, Mr. Wedgwood purchased a travelling
carriage, and wandered up and down England, taking Coleridge as
his companion. And, as a desperate attempt to rouse and irritate
the decaying sensibility of his system, I have been assured, by a
surviving friend, that Mr. Wedgwood at one time opened a butcher's
shop, conceiving that the affronts and disputes to which such a
situation would expose him might act beneficially upon his increasing
torpor. This strange expedient[59] served only to express the anguish
which had now mastered his nature; it was soon abandoned; and this
accomplished but miserable man at length sank under his sufferings.
What made the case more memorable was the combination of worldly
prosperity which forced into strong relief and fiery contrast this
curse written in the flesh. He was rich, he was young, he was popular,
distinguished for his scientific attainments, publicly honoured for
patriotic services, and had before him, when he first fell ill, every
prospect of a career even nationally splendid.

By the death of Mr. Wedgwood, Coleridge succeeded to a regular annuity
of £75, which that gentleman had bequeathed to him. The other Mr.
Wedgwood granted him an equal allowance. Now came his marriage, his
connexion with politics and political journals, his residence in
various parts of Somersetshire, and his consequent introduction to
Mr. Wordsworth. In his politics, Mr. Coleridge was most sincere and
most enthusiastic. No man hailed with profounder sympathy the French
Revolution; and, though he saw cause to withdraw his regard from
many of the democratic zealots in this country, and even from the
revolutionary interest as it was subsequently conducted, he continued
to worship the original revolutionary cause in a pure Miltonic spirit;
and he continued also to abominate the policy of Mr. Pitt in a degree
which I myself find it difficult to understand. The very spirited
little poem of "Fire, Famine, and Slaughter," who are supposed to meet
in conference, to describe their horrid triumphs, and then to ask in
a whisper _who_ it was that unchained them,--to which each in turn
replies,

     "Letters four do form his name!"--

expresses his horror of Mr. Pitt personally in a most extravagant
shape, but merely for the purpose of poetic effect; for he had no real
unkindness in his heart towards any human being; and I have often heard
him disclaim the hatred which is here expressed for Mr. Pitt, as he
did also very elaborately and earnestly in print. Somewhere about this
time, Coleridge attempted, under Sheridan's countenance, to bring a
tragedy upon the stage of Drury Lane; but his prospect of success, as I
once heard or read, was suddenly marred by Mr. Sheridan's inability to
sacrifice what he thought a good jest. One scene presented a cave with
streams of water weeping down the sides; and the first words were, in a
sort of mimicry of the sound, "Drip, drip, drip!" Upon which Sheridan
repeated aloud to the assembled green-room, expressly convoked for the
purpose of hearing the play read, "Drip, drip, drip!--why, God bless
me, there's nothing here but _dripping_!" and so arose a chorus of
laughter amongst the actors fatal for the moment to the probationary
play.

About the latter end of the century, Coleridge visited North Germany
again, in company with Mr. and Miss Wordsworth.[60] Their tour was
chiefly confined to the Hartz Forest and its neighbourhood. But the
incident most worthy of remembrance in their excursion was a visit
made to Klopstock; either at Hamburgh, or, perhaps, at the Danish
town of Altona, on the same river Elbe; for Klopstock was a pensioner
of the Danish king. An anonymous writer, who attacked Coleridge
most truculently in an early number of "Blackwood," and with an
_acharnement_ that must astonish the neutral reader, has made the
mistake of supposing Coleridge to have been the chief speaker, who
did not speak at all. The case was this: Klopstock could not speak
English, though everybody remembers the pretty broken English[61]
of his second wife. Neither Coleridge nor Wordsworth, on the other
hand, was able to _speak_ German with any fluency. French, therefore,
was the only medium of free communication; that being pretty equally
familiar to Wordsworth and to Klopstock. But Coleridge found so much
difficulty even in _reading_ French that, wherever (as in the case of
Leibnitz's "Theodicée") there was a choice between an original written
in French and a translation, though it might be a very faulty one,
in German, he always preferred the latter. Hence it happened that
Wordsworth, on behalf of the English party, was the sole supporter of
the dialogue. The anonymous critic says another thing, which certainly
has an air of truth--viz. that Klopstock plays a very secondary _rôle_
in the interview (or words to that effect). But how was this to be
avoided in reporting the case, supposing the fact to have been such?
Now, the plain truth is that Wordsworth, upon his own ground, was
an incomparable talker; whereas "Klubstick" (as Coleridge used to
call him) was always a feeble and slovenly one, because a loose and
incoherent thinker. Besides, he was now old and decaying. Nor at any
time, nor in any accomplishment, could Klopstock have shone, unless in
the respectable art of skating. _There_ he had a real advantage. The
author of "The Messiah," I have authority for saying, skated with the
ease and grace of a regular artist; whereas the poet of the "Excursion"
sprawled upon the ice like a cow dancing a cotillon. Wordsworth did the
very opposite of that with which he was taxed; for, happening to look
down at Klopstock's swollen legs, and recollecting his age, he felt
touched by a sort of filial pity for his helplessness. And he came to
the conclusion that it would not seem becoming in a young and as yet
obscure author to report too consciously the real superiority which he
found it easy to maintain in such a colloquy.

But neither had Klopstock the pretensions as a poet which the
Blackwood writer seems to take for granted. Germany, the truth is,
wanted a great epic poet. Not having produced one in that early and
plastic stage of her literary soil when such a growth is natural and
spontaneous, the next thing was to bespeak a substitute. The force
of Coleridge's well-known repartee, when, in reply to a foreigner
asserting for Klopstock the rank of German Milton, he said, "True,
sir; a very _German_ Milton," cannot be fully appreciated but by one
who is familiar with the German poetry, and the small proportion in
which it is a natural, racy, and domestic growth. It has been often
noticed as the misfortune of the Roman literature that it grew up too
much under the oppression of Grecian models, and of Grecian models
depraved by Alexandrian art--a fact, so far as it _was_ a fact, which
tended to cripple the _genial_ and characteristic spirit of the
national mind. But this evil, after all, did not take effect except
in a partial sense. Rome had cast much of her literature in her own
moulds before these exotic models had begun to domineer. In fact, the
reproach is in a very narrow sense true. Not so with Germany. Her
literature, since its revival in the last century (and the revival upon
the impulse of what cattle!--Bodmer on the one hand, and Gottsched,
the never-enough-to-be-despised Gottsched, on the other!) has hardly
moved a step in the freedom of natural grace. England for nineteen, and
France for the twentieth, of all her capital works, has given the too
servile law: and, with regard to Klopstock, if ever there was a good
exemplification of the spurious and the counterfeit in literature, seek
it in "The Messiah." He is verily and indeed the _Birmingham_ Milton.
This Klopstockian dialogue, by the way, was first printed (hardly
_published_) in the original, or Lake edition of "The Friend." In the
recast of that work it was omitted; nor has it been printed anywhere
else that I am aware of.

About the close of the first revolutionary war it must have been, or
in the brief interval of peace, that Coleridge resorted to the English
Lakes as a place of residence.[62] Wordsworth had a natural connexion
with that region, by birth, breeding, and family alliances. Wordsworth
must have attracted Coleridge to the Lakes; and Coleridge, through his
affinity to Southey, eventually attracted _him_. Southey, as is known
to all who take an interest in the Lake colony, married a sister of
Mrs. Coleridge's; and, as a singular eccentricity in the circumstances
of that marriage, I may mention that, on his wedding-day, and from
the very portico of the church, Southey left his bride to embark for
Lisbon. His uncle, Dr. Herbert, was chaplain to the English factory in
that city; and it was to benefit by the facilities in that way opened
to him for seeing Portugal that Southey now went abroad. He extended
his tour to Spain; and the result of his notices was communicated to
the world in a volume of travels. By such accidents of personal or
family connexion as I have mentioned was the Lake colony gathered;
and the critics of the day, unaware of the real facts, supposed them
to have assembled under common views in literature--particularly with
regard to the true functions of poetry, and the true theory of poetic
diction. Under this original blunder, laughable it is to mention
that they went on to _find_ in their writings all the agreements and
common characteristics which their blunder had presumed; and they
incorporated the whole community under the name of the _Lake School_.
Yet Wordsworth and Southey never had one principle in common; their
hostility was even flagrant. Indeed, Southey troubled himself little
about abstract principles in anything; and, so far from agreeing with
Wordsworth to the extent of setting up a separate school in poetry, he
told me himself (August 1812) that he highly disapproved both of Mr.
Wordsworth's theories and of his practice. It is very true that one man
may sympathize with another, or even follow his leading, unconscious
that he does so; or he may go so far as, in the very act of virtual
imitation, to deem himself in opposition; but this sort of blind
agreement could hardly be supposed of two men so discerning and so
self-examining as Wordsworth and Southey. And, in fact, a philosophic
investigation of the difficult questions connected with this whole
slang about schools, Lake schools, &c., would show that Southey has
not, nor ever had, any _peculiarities_ in common with Wordsworth,
beyond that of exchanging the old prescriptive diction of poetry,
introduced between the periods of Milton and Cowper, for the simpler
and profounder forms of daily life in some instances, and of the
Bible in others. The bold and uniform practice of Wordsworth was here
adopted, on perfectly independent views, by Southey. In this respect,
however, Cowper had already begun the reform; and his influence,
concurring with the now larger influence of Wordsworth, has operated so
extensively as to make their own original differences at this day less
perceptible.

By the way, the word _colony_ reminds me that I have omitted to mention
in its proper place some scheme for migrating to America which had
been entertained by Coleridge and Southey about the year 1794-95,
under the learned name of _Pantisocracy_. So far as I ever heard, it
differed little, except in its Grecian name, from any other scheme for
mitigating the privations of a wilderness by settling in a cluster of
families, bound together by congenial tastes and uniform principles,
rather than in self-depending, insulated households. Steadily pursued,
it might, after all, have been a fortunate plan for Coleridge.
"Soliciting my food from daily toil," a line in which Coleridge alludes
to the scheme, implies a condition of life that would have upheld
Coleridge's health and happiness somewhat better than the habits of
luxurious city life as now constituted in Europe. But, returning[63]
to the Lakes, and to the Lake colony of poets: So little were Southey
and Wordsworth connected by any personal intercourse in those days,
and so little disposed to be connected, that, whilst the latter had
a cottage in Grasmere, Southey pitched his tent at Greta Hall, on a
little eminence rising immediately from the river Greta and the town
of Keswick. Grasmere is in Westmoreland; Keswick in Cumberland; and
they are thirteen good miles apart. Coleridge and his family were
domiciliated in Greta Hall; sharing that house, a tolerably large one,
on some principle of amicable division, with Mr. Southey. But Coleridge
personally was more often to be found at Grasmere--which presented the
threefold attractions of loveliness so complete as to eclipse even the
scenery of Derwentwater; a pastoral state of society, free from the
deformities of a little town like Keswick; and, finally, for Samuel
Taylor Coleridge, the society of Wordsworth. Not before 1815 or 1816
could it be said that Southey and Wordsworth were even upon friendly
terms; so entirely is it untrue that they combined to frame a school of
poetry. Up to that time, they viewed each other with mutual respect,
but also with mutual dislike; almost, I might say, with mutual disgust.
Wordsworth disliked in Southey the want of depth, or the apparent want,
as regards the power of philosophic abstraction. Southey disliked in
Wordsworth the air of dogmatism, and the unaffable haughtiness of his
manner. Other more trivial reasons combined with these.

At this time, when Coleridge first settled at the Lakes, or not long
after, a romantic and somewhat tragical affair drew the eyes of all
England, and, for many years, continued to draw the steps of tourists,
to one of the most secluded Cumberland valleys, so little visited
previously that it might be described almost as an undiscovered
chamber of that romantic district. Coleridge was brought into a closer
connexion with this affair than merely by the general relation of
neighbourhood; for an article of his in a morning paper, I believe,
unintentionally furnished the original clue for unmasking the base
impostor who figured as the central actor in this tale. The tale was
at that time dramatized, and scenically represented by some of the
minor theatres in London, as noticed by Wordsworth in the "Prelude."
But other generations have arisen since that time, who must naturally
be unacquainted with the circumstances; and on their account I will
here recall them:--One day in the Lake season there drove up to the
Royal Oak, the principal inn at Keswick, a handsome and well-appointed
travelling carriage, containing one gentleman of somewhat dashing
exterior. The stranger was a picturesque-hunter, but not of that order
who fly round the ordinary tour with the velocity of lovers posting to
Gretna, or of criminals running from the police; his purpose was to
domiciliate himself in this beautiful scenery, and to see it at his
leisure. From Keswick, as his head-quarters, he made excursions in
every direction amongst the neighbouring valleys; meeting generally a
good deal of respect and attention, partly on account of his handsome
equipage, and still more from his visiting cards, which designated him
as "The Hon. Augustus Hope." Under this name, he gave himself out for
a brother of Lord Hopetoun's. Some persons had discernment enough to
doubt of this; for the man's breeding and deportment, though showy,
had an under-tone of vulgarity about it; and Coleridge assured me that
he was grossly ungrammatical in his ordinary conversation. However,
one fact, soon dispersed by the people of a little rustic post-office,
laid asleep all demurs; he not only received letters addressed to
him under this assumed name--_that_ might be through collusion with
accomplices--but he himself continually _franked_ letters by that name.
Now, this being a capital offence, being not only a forgery, but (as
a forgery on the Post-Office) sure to be prosecuted, nobody presumed
to question his pretensions any longer; and, henceforward, he went to
all places with the consideration attached to an earl's brother. All
doors flew open at his approach; boats, boatmen, nets, and the most
unlimited sporting privileges, were placed at the disposal of the
"Honourable" gentleman: and the hospitality of the district was put on
its mettle, in offering a suitable reception to the patrician Scotsman.
It could be no blame to a shepherd girl, bred in the sternest solitude
which England has to show, that she should fall into a snare which many
of her betters had not escaped. Nine miles from Keswick, by the nearest
bridle-road through Newlands, but fourteen or fifteen by any route
which the honourable gentleman's travelling-carriage could traverse,
lies the Lake of Buttermere. Its margin, which is overhung by some of
the loftiest and steepest of the Cumbrian mountains, exhibits on either
side few traces of human neighbourhood; the level area, where the
hills recede enough to allow of any, is of a wild pastoral character,
or almost savage; the waters of the lake are deep and sullen; and the
barrier mountains, by excluding the sun for much of his daily course,
strengthen the gloomy impressions. At the foot of this lake (that is,
at the end where its waters issue) lie a few unornamented fields,
through which rolls a little brook-like river, connecting it with the
larger lake of Crummock; and at the edge of this miniature domain,
upon the roadside, stands a cluster of cottages, so small and few that
in the richer tracts of England they would scarcely be complimented
with the name of hamlet. One of these, and I believe the principal,
belonged to an independent proprietor, called, in the local dialect,
a "_Statesman_"[64]; and more, perhaps, for the sake of attracting a
little society than with much view to pecuniary profit at that era,
this cottage offered the accommodations of an inn to the traveller
and his horse. Rare, however, must have been the mounted traveller in
those days, unless visiting Buttermere for itself, and as a _terminus
ad quem_; since the road led to no further habitations of man, with
the exception of some four or five pastoral cabins, equally humble, in
Gatesgarthdale.

Hither, however, in an evil hour for the peace of this little
brotherhood of shepherds, came the cruel spoiler from Keswick. His
errand was, to witness or to share in the char-fishing; for in
Derwentwater (the Lake of Keswick) no char is found, which breeds only
in the deep waters, such as Windermere, Crummock, Buttermere, and
Coniston--never in the shallow ones. But, whatever had been his first
object, _that_ was speedily forgotten in one more deeply interesting.
The daughter of the house, a fine young woman of eighteen, acted as
waiter.[65] In a situation so solitary, the stranger had unlimited
facilities for enjoying her company, and recommending himself to her
favour. Doubts about his pretensions never arose in so simple a place
as this; they were overruled before they could well have arisen by the
opinion now general in Keswick, that he really was what he pretended to
be: and thus, with little demur, except in the shape of a few natural
words of parting anger from a defeated or rejected rustic admirer, the
young woman gave her hand in marriage to the showy and unprincipled
stranger. I know not whether the marriage was, or could have been,
celebrated in the little mountain chapel of Buttermere. If it were,
I persuade myself that the most hardened villain must have felt a
momentary pang on violating the altar of such a chapel; so touchingly
does it express, by its miniature dimensions, the almost helpless
humility of that little pastoral community to whose spiritual wants
it has from generation to generation administered. It is not only
the very smallest chapel by many degrees in all England, but is so
mere a toy in outward appearance that, were it not for its antiquity,
its wild mountain exposure, and its consecrated connexion with the
final hopes and fears of the adjacent pastoral hamlet--but for these
considerations, the first movement of a stranger's feelings would be
towards loud laughter; for the little chapel looks not so much a mimic
chapel in a drop-scene from the Opera House as a miniature copy from
such a scene; and evidently could not receive within its walls more
than half a dozen of households. From this sanctuary it was--from
beneath the maternal shadow, if not from the very altar,[66] of this
lonely chapel--that the heartless villain carried off the flower of
the mountains. Between this place and Keswick they continued to move
backwards and forwards, until at length, with the startling of a
thunder-clap to the affrighted mountaineers, the bubble burst: officers
of justice appeared: the stranger was easily intercepted from flight,
and, upon a capital charge, was borne away to Carlisle. At the ensuing
assizes he was tried for forgery on the prosecution of the Post-Office,
found guilty, left for execution, and executed accordingly.[67] On
the day of his condemnation, Wordsworth and Coleridge passed through
Carlisle, and endeavoured to obtain an interview with him. Wordsworth
succeeded; but, for some unknown reason, the prisoner steadily refused
to see Coleridge; a caprice which could not be penetrated. It is true
that he had, during his whole residence at Keswick, avoided Coleridge
with a solicitude which had revived the original suspicions against him
in some quarters, after they had generally gone to sleep. But for this
his motive had then been sufficient: he was of a Devonshire family,
and naturally feared the eye, or the inquisitive examination of one
who bore a name immemorially associated with the southern part of that
county.

Coleridge, however, had been transplanted so immaturely from his
native region that few people in England knew less of its family
connexions. That, perhaps, was unknown to this malefactor; but, at
any rate, he knew that all motive was now at an end for disguise of
any sort; so that his reserve, in this particular, had now become
unintelligible. However, if not him, Coleridge saw and examined his
very interesting papers. These were chiefly letters from women whom he
had injured, pretty much in the same way, and by the same impostures,
as he had so recently practised in Cumberland; and, as Coleridge
assured me, were in part the most agonizing appeals that he had ever
read to human justice and pity. The man's real name was, I think,
Hatfield. And amongst the papers were two separate correspondences, of
some length, with two young women, apparently of superior condition
in life (one the daughter of an English clergyman), whom this villain
had deluded by marriage, and, after some cohabitation, abandoned,--one
of them with a family of young children. Great was the emotion of
Coleridge when he recurred to his remembrance of these letters, and
bitter, almost vindictive, was the indignation with which he spoke
of Hatfield. One set of letters appeared to have been written under
too certain a knowledge of _his_ villany to whom they were addressed;
though still relying on some possible remains of humanity, or perhaps
(the poor writer might think) on some lingering preference for herself.
The other set was even more distressing; they were written under the
first conflicts of suspicions, alternately repelling with warmth the
gloomy doubts which were fast arising, and then yielding to their
afflicting evidence; raving in one page under the misery of alarm, in
another courting the delusions of hope, and luring back the perfidious
deserter,--here resigning herself to despair, and there again labouring
to show that all might yet be well. Coleridge said often, in looking
back upon that frightful exposure of human guilt and misery, that the
man who, when pursued by these heart-rending apostrophes, and with
this litany of anguish sounding in his ears, from despairing women
and from famishing children, could yet find it possible to enjoy the
calm pleasures of a Lake tourist, and deliberately to hunt for the
picturesque, must have been a fiend of that order which fortunately
does not often emerge amongst men. It is painful to remember that,
in those days, amongst the multitudes who ended their career in the
same ignominious way, and the majority for offences connected with
the forgery of bank notes, there must have been a considerable number
who perished from the very opposite cause--viz., because they felt,
too passionately and profoundly for prudence, the claims of those who
looked up to them for support. One common scaffold confounds the most
flinty hearts and the tenderest. However, in this instance, it was
in some measure the heartless part of Hatfield's conduct which drew
upon him his ruin: for the Cumberland jury honestly declared their
unwillingness to hang him for having forged a frank; and both they,
and those who refused to aid his escape when first apprehended, were
reconciled to this harshness entirely by what they heard of his conduct
to their injured young fellow-countrywoman.

She, meantime, under the name of _The Beauty of Buttermere_, became
an object of interest to all England; melodramas were produced in the
London suburban[68] theatres upon her story; and, for many a year
afterwards, shoals of tourists crowded to the secluded lake, and the
little homely cabaret, which had been the scene of her brief romance;
It was fortunate for a person in her distressing situation that
her home was not in a town: the few and simple neighbours, who had
witnessed her imaginary elevation, having little knowledge of worldly
feelings, never for an instant connected with her disappointment any
sense of the ludicrous, or spoke of it as a calamity to which her
vanity might have co-operated. They treated it as unmixed injury,
reflecting shame upon nobody but the wicked perpetrator. Hence, without
much trial to her womanly sensibilities, she found herself able to
resume her situation in the little inn; and this she continued to hold
for many years. In that place, and that capacity, I saw her repeatedly,
and shall here say a word upon her personal appearance, because the
Lake poets all admired her greatly. Her figure was, in my eyes, good;
but I doubt whether most of my readers would have thought it such. She
was none of your evanescent, wasp-waisted beauties; on the contrary,
she was rather large every way; tallish, and proportionably broad. Her
face was fair, and her features feminine; and, unquestionably, she
was what all the world would have agreed to call "good-looking." But,
except in her arms, which had something of a statuesque beauty, and
in her carriage, which expressed a womanly grace, together with some
degree of dignity and self-possession, I confess that I looked in vain
for any _positive_ qualities of any sort or degree. _Beautiful_, in
any emphatic sense, she was not. Everything about her face and bust
was negative; simply without offence. Even this, however, was more
than could be said at all times; for the expression of her countenance
_could_ be disagreeable. This arose out of her situation; connected
as it was with defective sensibility and a misdirected pride. Nothing
operates so differently upon different minds and different styles of
beauty as the inquisitive gaze of strangers, whether in the spirit of
respectful admiration or of insolence. Some I have seen upon whose
angelic beauty this sort of confusion settled advantageously, and like
a softening veil; others, in whom it meets with proud resentment, are
sometimes disfigured by it. In Mary of Buttermere it roused mere anger
and disdain; which, meeting with the sense of her humble and dependent
situation, gave birth to a most unhappy aspect of countenance. Men who
had no touch of a gentleman's nature in their composition sometimes
insulted her by looks and by words, supposing that they purchased
the right to do this by an extra half-crown; and she too readily
attributed the same spirit of impertinent curiosity to every man whose
eyes happened to settle steadily upon her face. Yet, once at least,
I must have seen her under the most favourable circumstances: for,
on my first visit to Buttermere, I had the pleasure of Mr. Southey's
company, who was incapable of wounding anybody's feelings, and to Mary,
in particular, was well known by kind attentions, and I believe by
some services. Then, at least, I saw her to advantage, and perhaps,
for a figure of her build, at the best age; for it was about nine or
ten years after her misfortune, when she might be twenty-seven or
twenty-eight years old. We were alone, a solitary pair of tourists:
nothing arose to confuse or distress her. She waited upon us at dinner,
and talked to us freely. "This is a respectable young woman," I said
to myself; but nothing of that enthusiasm could I feel which beauty,
such as I _have_ beheld at the Lakes, would have been apt to raise
under a similar misfortune. One lady, not very scrupulous in her
embellishments of facts, used to tell an anecdote of her which I hope
was exaggerated. Some friend of hers (as she affirmed), in company with
a large party, visited Buttermere within one day after that upon which
Hatfield suffered; and she protested that Mary threw upon the table,
with an emphatic gesture, the Carlisle paper containing an elaborate
account of his execution.

It is an instance of Coleridge's carelessness that he, who had as
little of fixed ill-nature in his temper as any person whom I have ever
known, managed, in reporting this story at the time of its occurrence,
to get himself hooked into a personal quarrel, which hung over his
head unsettled for nine or ten years. A Liverpool merchant, who was
then meditating a house in the Vale of Grasmere, and perhaps might
have incurred Coleridge's anger by thus disturbing, with inappropriate
intrusions, this loveliest of all English landscapes, had connected
himself a good deal with Hatfield during his Keswick masquerade; and
was said even to have carried his regard to that villain so far as
to have christened one of his own children by the names of "Augustus
Hope." With these and other circumstances, expressing the extent of
the infatuation amongst the swindler's dupes, Coleridge made the
public merry. Naturally, the Liverpool merchant was not amongst those
who admired the facetiousness of Coleridge on this occasion, but
swore vengeance whenever they should meet. They never _did_ meet,
until ten years had gone by; and then, oddly enough, it was in the
Liverpool man's own house--in that very nuisance of a house which had,
I suppose, first armed Coleridge's wrath against him. This house, by
time and accident, in no very wonderful way, had passed into the hands
of Wordsworth as tenant. Coleridge, as was still less wonderful, had
become the visitor of Wordsworth on returning from Malta; and the
Liverpool merchant, as was also natural, either seeking his rent, or on
the general errand of a friendly visit, calling upon Wordsworth, met
Coleridge in the hall. Now came the hour for settling old accounts. I
was present, and can report the case. Both looked grave, and coloured
a little. But ten years work wonders: an armistice of that duration
heals many a wound; and Samuel Taylor Coleridge, requesting his enemy's
company in the garden, entered upon a long metaphysical dissertation,
bordering upon what you might call _philosophical rigmarole_, and
rather puzzling to answer. It seemed to be an expansion, by Thomas
Aquinas, of that parody upon a well-known passage in Shenstone, where
the writer says--

     "He kick'd me down-stairs with such a sweet grace
     That I thought he was handing me up."

And, in the upshot, this conclusion _eventuated_ (to speak
Yankeeishly), that purely on principles of good neighbourhood and
universal philanthropy could Coleridge have meditated or executed the
insult offered in the "Morning Post." The Liverpool merchant rubbed his
forehead, and seemed a little perplexed; but he was a most good-natured
man; and he was eminently a gentleman. At length, considering, perhaps,
how very like Duns Scotus, or Albertus Magnus, Coleridge had shown
himself in this luminous explanation, he might begin to reflect that,
had any one of those distinguished men offered a similar affront, it
would have been impossible to resent it; for who could think of kicking
the "Doctor Seraphicus," or would it tell to any man's advantage
in history that he had caned Thomas Aquinas? On these principles,
therefore, without saying one word, Liverpoliensis held out his hand,
and a lasting reconciliation followed.

Not very long, I believe, after this affair of Hatfield, Coleridge went
to Malta.[69] His inducement to such a step must have been merely a
desire to see the most interesting regions of the Mediterranean under
the shelter and advantageous introduction of an official station.
It was, however, an unfortunate chapter of his life: for, being
necessarily thrown a good deal upon his own resources in the narrow
society of a garrison, he there confirmed and cherished, if he did not
there form, his habit of taking opium in large quantities. I am the
last person in the world to press conclusions harshly or uncandidly
against Coleridge; but I believe it to be notorious that he first began
the use of opium, not as a relief from any bodily pains or nervous
irritations (since his constitution was strong and excellent), but as
a source of luxurious sensations. It is a great misfortune, at least it
is a great peril, to have tasted the enchanted cup of youthful rapture
incident to the poetic temperament. That fountain of high-wrought
sensibility once unlocked experimentally, it is rare to see a
submission afterwards to the insipidities of daily life. Coleridge, to
speak in the words of Cervantes, wanted better bread than was made of
wheat; and, when youthful blood no longer sustained the riot of his
animal spirits, he endeavoured to excite them by artificial stimulants.

At Malta he became acquainted with Commodore Decatur and other
Americans of distinction; and this brought him afterwards into
connexion with Allston, the American artist. Of Sir Alexander Ball,
one of Lord Nelson's captains in the battle of the Nile, and Governor
of Malta, he spoke and wrote uniformly in a lavish style of panegyric,
for which plainer men found it difficult to see the slightest ground.
It was, indeed, Coleridge's infirmity to project his own mind, and his
own very peculiar ideas, nay, even his own expressions and illustrative
metaphors, upon other men, and to contemplate these reflex images
from himself as so many characters having an absolute ground in some
separate object. "Ball and Bell"--"Bell and Ball,"[70] were two of
these pet subjects; he had a "craze" about each of them; and to each
he ascribed thoughts and words to which, had they been put upon the
rack, they never would have confessed.

From Malta, on his return homewards,[71] he went to Rome and Naples.
One of the cardinals, he tells us, warned him, by the Pope's wish,
of some plot, set on foot by Bonaparte, for seizing him as an
anti-Gallican writer. This statement was ridiculed by the anonymous
assailant in "Blackwood" as the very consummation of moonstruck
vanity; and it is there compared to John Dennis's frenzy in retreating
from the sea-coast, under the belief that Louis XIV had commissioned
emissaries to land on the English shore and make a dash at his person.
But, after all, the thing is not so entirely improbable. For it is
certain that some orator of the Opposition (Charles Fox, as Coleridge
asserts) had pointed out all the principal writers in the "Morning
Post" to Napoleon's vengeance, by describing the war as a war "of that
journal's creation."[72] And, as to the insinuation that Napoleon was
above throwing his regards upon a simple writer of political essays,
_that_ is not only abundantly confuted by many scores of established
cases, but also is specially put down by a case circumstantially
recorded in the Second Tour to Paris by the celebrated John Scott of
Aberdeen.[73] It there appears that, on no other ground whatever than
that of his connexion with the London newspaper press, some friend of
Mr. Scott's had been courted most assiduously by Napoleon during the
_Hundred Days_. Assuredly Coleridge deserved, beyond all other men
that ever were connected with the daily press, to be regarded with
distinction. Worlds of fine thinking lie buried in that vast abyss,
never to be disentombed or restored to human admiration. Like the sea,
it has swallowed treasures without end, that no diving-bell will bring
up again. But nowhere, throughout its shoreless magazines of wealth,
does there lie such a bed of pearls confounded with the rubbish and
"purgamenta" of ages, as in the political papers of Coleridge. No more
_appreciable_ monument could be raised to the memory of Coleridge than
a republication of his essays in the "Morning Post," and afterwards
in the "Courier." And here, by the way, it may be mentioned that
the sagacity of Coleridge, as applied to the signs of the times, is
illustrated by this fact, that distinctly and solemnly he foretold the
restoration of the Bourbons, at a period when most people viewed such
an event as the most romantic of visions, and not less chimerical than
that "march upon Paris" of Lord Hawkesbury's which for so many years
supplied a theme of laughter to the Whigs.

Why Coleridge left Malta, is as difficult to explain upon any
principles of ordinary business, as why he had ever gone thither. The
post of secretary, if it imposed any official attendance of a regular
kind, or any official correspondence, must have been but poorly filled
by _him_; and Sir Alexander Ball, if I have collected his character
justly, was not likely to accept the gorgeous philosophy of Coleridge
as an indemnification for irregular performance of his public duties.
Perhaps, therefore, though on the best terms of mutual regard, mutually
they might be pleased to part. Part they did, at any rate, and poor
Coleridge was sea-sick the whole of his homeward (as he had been
through the whole of his outward) voyage.

It was not long after this event that my own introduction to Coleridge
occurred. At that time some negotiation was pending between him and the
Royal Institution, which ended in their engaging him to deliver a course
of lectures on Poetry and the Fine Arts during the ensuing winter.
For this series (twelve or sixteen, I think) he received a sum of one
hundred guineas. And, considering the slightness of the pains which
he bestowed upon them, he was well remunerated. I fear that they did
not increase his reputation; for never did any man treat his audience
with less respect, or his task with less careful attention. I was in
London for part of the time, and can report the circumstances, having
made a point of attending duly at the appointed hours. Coleridge was
at that time living uncomfortably enough at the "Courier" office, in
the Strand.[74] In such a situation, annoyed by the sound of feet
passing his chamber-door continually to the printing-rooms of this
great establishment, and with no gentle ministrations of female hands
to sustain his cheerfulness, naturally enough his spirits flagged; and
he took more than ordinary doses of opium. I called upon him daily, and
pitied his forlorn condition. There was no bell in the room; which for
many months answered the double purpose of bedroom and sitting-room.
Consequently, I often saw him, picturesquely enveloped in nightcaps,
surmounted by handkerchiefs indorsed upon handkerchiefs, shouting from
the attics of the "Courier" office, down three or four flights of
stairs, to a certain "Mrs. Brainbridge," his sole attendant, whose
dwelling was in the subterranean regions of the house. There did I
often see the philosopher, with the most lugubrious of faces, invoking
with all his might this uncouth name of "Brainbridge," each syllable
of which he intonated with long-drawn emphasis, in order to overpower
the hostile hubbub coming downwards from the creaking press, and the
roar from the Strand, which entered at all the front windows. "Mistress
Brainbridge! I say, Mistress Brainbridge!" was the perpetual cry,
until I expected to hear the Strand, and distant Fleet Street, take
up the echo of "Brainbridge!" Thus unhappily situated, he sank more
than ever under the dominion of opium; so that, at two o'clock, when
he should have been in attendance at the Royal Institution, he was too
often unable to rise from bed. Then came dismissals of audience after
audience, with pleas of illness; and on many of his lecture days I have
seen all Albemarle Street closed by a "lock" of carriages, filled with
women of distinction, until the servants of the Institution or their
own footmen advanced to the carriage-doors with the intelligence that
Mr. Coleridge had been suddenly taken ill. This plea, which at first
had been received with expressions of concern, repeated too often,
began to rouse disgust. Many in anger, and some in real uncertainty
whether it would not be trouble thrown away, ceased to attend. And we
that were more constant too often found reason to be disappointed with
the quality of his lecture. His appearance was generally that of a
person struggling with pain and overmastering illness. His lips were
baked with feverish heat, and often black in colour; and, in spite
of the water which he continued drinking through the whole course
of his lecture, he often seemed to labour under an almost paralytic
inability to raise the upper jaw from the lower. In such a state, it
is clear that nothing could save the lecture itself from reflecting
his own feebleness and exhaustion, except the advantage of having
been precomposed in some happier mood. But that never happened: most
unfortunately he relied upon his extempore ability to carry him
through. Now, had he been in spirits, or had he gathered animation,
and kindled by his own motion, no written lecture could have been
more effectual than one of his unpremeditated colloquial harangues.
But either he was depressed originally below the point from which
any re-ascent was possible, or else this re-action was intercepted by
continual disgust from looking back upon his own ill-success; for,
assuredly, he never once recovered that free and eloquent movement
of thought which he could command at any time in a private company.
The passages he read, moreover, in illustrating his doctrines, were
generally unhappily chosen, because chosen at haphazard, from the
difficulty of finding at a moment's summons those passages which his
purpose required. Nor do I remember any that produced much effect,
except two or three, which I myself put ready marked into his hands,
among the Metrical Romances edited by Ritson.

Generally speaking, the selections were as injudicious and as
inappropriate as they were ill delivered; for, amongst Coleridge's
accomplishments, good reading was not one; he had neither voice
(so, at least, _I_ thought) nor management of voice. This defect is
unfortunate in a public lecturer; for it is inconceivable how much
weight and effectual pathos can be communicated by sonorous depth and
melodious cadences of the human voice to sentiments the most trivial;
nor, on the other hand, how the grandest are emasculated by a style of
reading which fails in distributing the lights and shadows of a musical
intonation. However, this defect chiefly concerned the immediate
impression; the most afflicting to a friend of Coleridge's was the
entire absence of his own peculiar and majestic intellect; no heart,
no soul, was in anything he said; no strength of feeling in recalling
universal truths; no power of originality or compass of moral relations
in his novelties: all was a poor faint reflection from jewels once
scattered in the highway by himself in the prodigality of his early
opulence--a mendicant dependence on the alms dropped from his own
overflowing treasury of happier times.

The next opportunity I had of seeing Coleridge was at the Lakes, in
the winter of 1809, and up to the autumn of the following year. During
this period it was that he carried on the original publication of "The
Friend"[75]; and for much the greater part of the time I saw him
daily. He lived as a visitor in the house occupied by Mr. Wordsworth.
This house (Allan Bank by name) was in Grasmere; and in another part
of the same vale, at a distance of barely one mile, I myself had a
cottage, and a considerable library. Many of my books being German,
Coleridge borrowed them in great numbers. Having a general license
from me to use them as he would, he was in the habit of accumulating
them so largely at Allan Bank (the name of Mr. Wordsworth's house)
that sometimes as many as five hundred were absent at once: which
I mention in order to notice a practice of Coleridge's, indicating
his very scrupulous honour in what regarded the rights of ownership.
Literary people are not always so strict in respecting property of this
description; and I know more than one celebrated man who professes
as a maxim that he holds it no duty of honour to restore a borrowed
book; not to speak of many less celebrated persons, who, without
openly professing such a principle, do however, in fact, exhibit a lax
morality in such cases. The more honourable it was to poor Coleridge,
who had means so trifling of buying books for himself, that, to prevent
my flocks from mixing and being confounded with the flocks already
folded at Allan Bank (his own and Wordsworth's), or rather that they
_might_ mix without danger, he duly inscribed my name in the blank
leaves of every volume; a fact which became rather painfully made known
to me; for, as he had chosen to dub me _Esquire_, many years after
this it cost myself and a female friend some weeks of labour to hunt
out these multitudinous memorials and to erase this heraldic addition;
which else had the appearance to a stranger of having been conferred by
myself.

"The Friend," in its original publication, was, as a pecuniary
speculation, the least judicious, both for its objects and its means,
I have ever known. It was printed at Penrith, a town in Cumberland, on
the outer verge of the Lake district, and precisely twenty-eight miles
removed from Coleridge's abode. This distance, enough of itself, in
all conscience, was at least trebled in effect by the interposition
of Kirkstone, a mountain which is scaled by a carriage ascent of
three miles long, and so steep in parts that, without four horses,
no solitary traveller can persuade the neighbouring innkeepers to
carry him. Another road, by way of Keswick, is subject to its own
separate difficulties. And thus, in any practical sense, for ease, for
certainty, and for despatch, Liverpool, ninety-five miles distant,
was virtually nearer. Dublin even, or Cork, was more eligible. Yet,
in this town, so situated as I have stated, by way of purchasing
such intolerable difficulties at the highest price, Coleridge was
advised, and actually persuaded, to set up a printer, to buy, to lay
in a stock of paper, types, &c., instead of resorting to some printer
already established in Kendal, a large and opulent town not more than
eighteen miles distant, and connected by a daily post, whereas between
himself and Penrith there was no post at all. Building his mechanical
arrangements upon this utter "upside-down" inversion of all common
sense, it is not surprising (as "madness ruled the hour") that in all
other circumstances of plan or execution the work moved by principles
of downright crazy disregard to all that a judicious counsel would
have suggested. The subjects were chosen obstinately in defiance of
the popular taste; they were treated in a style studiously disfigured
by German modes of thinking, and by a German terminology; no attempt
was made to win or conciliate public taste; and the plans adopted for
obtaining payment were of a nature to insure a speedy bankruptcy to
the concern. Coleridge had a list--nobody could ever say upon whose
authority gathered together--of subscribers. He tells us himself that
many of these renounced the work from an early period; and some (as
Lord Corke) rebuked him for his presumption in sending it unordered,
but (as Coleridge asserts) neither returned the copies nor remitted
the price. And even those who were conscientious enough to do this
could not remit four or five shillings for as many numbers without
putting Coleridge to an expense of treble postage at the least. This
he complains of bitterly in his "Biographia Literaria," forgetting
evidently that the evil was due exclusively to his own defective
arrangements. People necessarily sent their subscriptions through
such channels as were open to them, or such as were pointed out by
Coleridge himself. It is also utterly unworthy of Coleridge to have
taxed, as he does, many of his subscribers (or really, for anything
that appears, the whole body) with neglecting to pay at all. Probably
not one neglected. And some ladies, to my knowledge, scrupulously
anxious about transmitting their subscriptions, paid three times over.
Managed as the reader will collect from these indications, the work
was going down-hill from the first. It never gained any accessions of
new subscribers; from what source, then, was the continual dropping
off of names to be supplied? The printer became a bankrupt: Coleridge
was as much in arrear with his articles as with his lectures at the
Royal Institution. _That_ he was from the very first; but now he
was disgusted and desponding; and with No. 28 or 29 the work came
to a final stop. Some years after, it was re-cast and re-published.
But, in fact, this re-cast was altogether and absolutely a new work.
The sole contributors to the original work had been, first of all,
Wordsworth who gave a very valuable paper on the principles concerned
in the composition of Epitaphs; and, secondly, Professor Wilson, who,
in conjunction with Mr. (now Dr.) Blair, an early friend,[76] then
visiting Mr. W. on Windermere, wrote the letter signed "Mathetes," the
reply to which came from Wordsworth.

At the Lakes, and summoned abroad by scenery so exquisite--living, too,
in the bosom of a family endeared to him by long friendship and by
sympathy the closest with all his propensities and tastes--Coleridge
(it may be thought) could not sequester himself so profoundly as at
the "Courier" Office within his own shell, or shut himself out so
completely from that large dominion of eye and ear amongst the hills,
the fields, and the woods, which once he had exercised so delightfully
to himself, and with a participation so immortal, through his exquisite
poems, to all generations. He was not now reduce to depend upon "Mrs.
Brainbridge"----(Mistress Brain--Brain--Brainbridge, I say----Oh
heavens! _is_ there, can there, was there, _will_ there ever at any
future period be, an undeniable use in saying and in pressing upon the
attention of the Strand and Fleet Street at their earliest convenience
the painful subject of Mistress Brain--Brain--Brainbridge, I say----
Do you hear, Mrs. Brain--Brain--Brainbridge----? Brain or Bain, it
matters little--Bran or Brain, it's all one, I conceive):--here, on
the contrary, he looked out from his study windows upon the sublime
hills of _Seat Sandal_ and _Arthur's Chair_, and upon pastoral cottages
at their feet; and all around him he heard hourly the murmurings of
happy life, the sound of female voices, and the innocent laughter of
children. But apparently he was not happy; opium, was it, or what was
it, that poisoned all natural pleasure at its sources? He burrowed
continually deeper into scholastic subtleties and metaphysical
abstractions; and, like that class described by Seneca in the luxurious
Rome of _his_ days, he lived chiefly by candlelight. At two or four
o'clock in the afternoon he would make his first appearance. Through
the silence of the night, when all other lights had disappeared in the
quiet cottages of Grasmere, _his_ lamp might be seen invariably by the
belated traveller, as he descended the long steep from Dunmailraise;
and at seven or eight o'clock in the morning, when man was going forth
to his labour, this insulated son of reverie was retiring to bed.

Society he did not much court, because much was not to be had; but
he did not shrink from any which wore the promise of novelty. At
that time the leading person about the Lakes, as regarded rank and
station, amongst those who had any connexion with literature, was
Dr. Watson, the well-known Bishop of Llandaff.[77] This dignitary I
knew myself as much as I wished to know him; he _was_ interesting;
yet also _not_ interesting; and I will speak of him circumstantially.
Those who have read his Autobiography, or are otherwise acquainted
with the outline of his career, will be aware that he was the son of
a Westmoreland schoolmaster. Going to Cambridge, with no great store
of classical knowledge, but with the more common accomplishment of
Westmoreland men, and one better suited to Cambridge, viz. a sufficient
basis of mathematics, and a robust though commonplace intellect for
improving his knowledge according to any direction which accident
should prescribe--he obtained the Professorship of Chemistry without
one iota of chemical knowledge up to the hour when he gained it; and
then, setting eagerly to work, that he might not disgrace the choice
which had thus distinguished him, long before the time arrived for
commencing his prelections he had made himself capable of writing
those beautiful essays on that science which, after a revolution and a
counter-revolution so great as succeeding times have witnessed, still
remain a cardinal book of introductory discipline to such studies:
an opinion deliberately expressed to myself by the late Sir Humphry
Davy, and in answer to an earnest question which I took the liberty
of proposing to him on that point. Sir Humphry said that he could
scarcely imagine a time, or a condition of the science, in which the
Bishop's "Essays" would be superannuated.[78] With this experimental
proof that a Chemical Chair might be won and honoured without previous
knowledge even of the chemical alphabet, he resolved to play the same
feat with the Royal Chair of Divinity; one far more important for
local honour and for wealth. Here, again, he succeeded; and this time
he extended his experiment; for, whereas both Chairs had been won
without _previous_ knowledge, he resolved that in this case it should
be maintained without _after_ knowledge. He applied himself simply to
the improvement of its income, which he raised from £300 to at least
£1000 per annum. All this he had accomplished before reaching the age
of thirty-five.

Riches are with us the parent of riches; and success, in the hands of
an active man, is the pledge of further success. On the basis of this
Cambridge preferment Dr. Watson built upwards, until he had raised
himself, in one way or other, to a seat in the House of Lords, and to a
commensurate income. For the latter half of his life, he--originally a
village schoolmaster's son--was able to associate with the _magnates_
of the land upon equal terms. And that fact, of itself, without another
word, implies, in this country, a degree of rank and fortune which one
would think a sufficient reward even for merit as unquestionable as
was that of Dr. Watson, considering that in _quality_ it was merit of
so vulgar a class. Yet he was always a discontented man, a railer at
the government and the age which could permit merit such as his to pine
away ingloriously in one of the humblest amongst the bishoprics, with
no other addition to its emoluments than the richest professorship in
Europe, and such other accidents in life as gave him in all, perhaps,
not above five thousand per annum! Poor man!--only five thousand per
annum! What a trial to a man's patience!--and how much he stood in need
of philosophy, or even of religion, to face so dismal a condition!

This bishop was himself, in a secondary way, no uninteresting study.
What I mean is, that, though originally the furthest removed from
an interesting person, being a man remarkable indeed for robust
faculties, but otherwise commonplace in his character, worldly-minded,
and coarse, even to obtuseness, in his sensibilities, he yet became
interesting from the strength of _degree_ with which these otherwise
repulsive characteristics were manifested. He was one of that numerous
order in whom even the love of knowledge is subordinate to schemes
of advancement; and to whom even his own success, and his own honour
consequent upon that success, had no higher value than according to
their use as instruments for winning further promotion. Hence it
was that, when by such aids he had mounted to a certain eminence,
beyond which he saw little promise of further ascent through any
assistance of _theirs_--since at this stage it was clear that party
connexion in politics must become his main reliance--he ceased to
regard his favourite sciences with interest. The very organs of his
early advancement were regarded with no gratitude or tenderness, when
it became clear that they could yield no more. Even chemistry was
now neglected. This, above all, was perplexing to one who did not
understand his character. For hither one would have supposed he might
have retreated from his political disappointments, and have found a
perpetual consolation in honours which no intrigues could defeat,
and in the esteem, so pure and untainted, which still attended the
honourable exertions of his youth. But he had not feeling enough for
that view; he looked at the matter in a very different light. Other
generations had come since then, and "other palms were won." To keep
pace with the advancing science, and to maintain his station amongst
his youthful competitors, would demand a youthful vigour and motives
such as theirs. But, as to himself, chemistry had given all it _could_
give. Having first raised himself to distinction by that, he had since
married into an ancient family--one of the leaders amongst the landed
aristocracy of his own county: he had thus entitled himself to call
the head of that family--a territorial potentate with ten thousand per
annum--by the contemptuous sobriquet of "Dull Daniel"; he looked down
upon numbers whom, twenty years before, he scarcely durst have looked
up to, except perhaps as a cat is privileged to look at a king; he had
obtained a bishopric. Chemistry had done all this for him; and had,
besides, co-operating with luck, put him in the way of reaping a large
estate from the gratitude and early death of his pupil, Mr. Luther. All
this chemistry had effected. Could chemistry do anything more? Clearly
not. It was a burnt-out volcano. And here it was that, having lost his
motives for cultivating it farther, he regarded the present improvers
of the science, not with the feelings natural to a disinterested
lover of such studies on their own account, but with jealousy, as men
who had eclipsed or had bedimmed his own once brilliant reputation.
Two revolutions had occurred since his own "palmy days"; Sir Humphry
Davy, he said, might be right; and all might be gold that glistened;
but, for his part, he was too old to learn new theories--he must be
content to hobble to his grave with such old-fashioned creeds as had
answered in his time, when, for aught he could see, men prospered as
much as in this newfangled world. Such was the tone of his ordinary
talk; and, in one sense--as regards personal claims, I mean--it was
illiberal enough; for the leaders of modern chemistry never overlooked
_his_ claims. Professor Thomson of Glasgow always spoke of his "Essays"
as of a book which hardly any revolution could antiquate; and Sir
Humphry Davy, in reply to a question which I put to him upon that
point in 1813, declared that he knew of no book better qualified as
one of introductory discipline to the youthful experimenter, or as an
apprenticeship to the taste in elegant selection of topics.

Yet, querulous and discontented as the bishop was, when he adverted
either to chemistry or to his own position in life, the reader must not
imagine to himself the ordinary "complement" and appurtenances of that
character--such as moroseness, illiberality, or stinted hospitalities.
On the contrary, his lordship was a joyous, jovial, and cordial host.
He was pleasant, and even kind, in his manners; most hospitable in his
reception of strangers, no matter of what party; and I must say that
he was as little overbearing in argument, and as little stood upon his
privilege in his character of a church dignitary, as any "big wig" I
have happened to know. He was somewhat pompous, undoubtedly; but that,
in an old academic hero, was rather agreeable, and had a characteristic
effect. He listened patiently to all your objections; and, though
steeped to the lips in prejudice, he was really candid. I mean to say
that, although, generally speaking, the unconscious pre-occupation of
his understanding shut up all avenues to new convictions, he yet did
his best to open his mind to any views that might be presented at the
moment. And, with regard to his querulous egotism, though it may appear
laughable enough to all who contrast his real pretensions with their
public appreciation as expressed in his acquired opulence and rank,
and who contrast, also, _his_ case with that of other men in his own
profession--with that of Paley, for example--yet it cannot be denied
that fortune had crossed his path, latterly, with foul winds, no less
strikingly than his early life had been seconded by her favouring
gales. In particular, Lord Holland[79] mentioned to a friend of my
own the following anecdote:--"What you say of the bishop may be very
true" (they were riding past his grounds at the time, which had turned
the conversation upon his character and public claims): "but to _us_"
(Lord Holland meant to the Whig party) "he was truly honourable and
faithful; insomuch that my uncle" (meaning, of course, Charles Fox)
"had agreed with Lord Grenville to make him Archbishop of York, _sede
vacante_;--all was settled; and, had we staid in power a little
longer, he would, beyond a doubt, have had that dignity."

Now, if the reader happens to recollect how soon the death of
Dr. Markham followed the sudden dissolution of that short-lived
administration in 1807, he will see how narrowly Dr. Watson missed
this elevation; and one must allow for a little occasional spleen
under such circumstances. How grand a thing, how princely, to be an
English archbishop! Yet, what an archbishop! He talked openly, at his
own table, as a Socinian; ridiculed the miracles of the New Testament,
which he professed to explain as so many chemical tricks, or cases
of legerdemain; and certainly had as little of devotional feeling as
any man that ever lived. It is, by comparison, a matter of little
consequence that, so slightly regarding the Church of which he called
himself a member in her spiritual interest, he should, in her temporal
interests, have been ready to lay her open to any assaults from almost
any quarter. He could naturally have little reverence for the rights
of the shepherds, having so very little for the pastoral office
itself, or for the manifold duties it imposes. All his public, all his
professional duties, he systematically neglected. He was a lord in
Parliament, and for many a year he never attended in his place: he was
a bishop, and he scarcely knew any part of his diocese by sight, living
three hundred miles away from it: he was a professor of divinity,
holding the richest professorship in Europe--the weightiest, for its
functions, in England--drawing, by his own admission, one thousand
per annum from its endowments (deducting some stipend to his _locum
tenens_ at Cambridge), and for thirty years he never read a lecture, or
performed a public exercise. Spheres how vast of usefulness to a man
as able as himself!--subjects of what bitter anguish on his deathbed
to one who had been tenderly conscientious! In his political purism,
and the unconscious partisanship of his constitutional scruples, he
was a true Whig, and thoroughly diverting. That Lord Lonsdale or that
the Duke of Northumberland should interfere with elections, this he
thought scandalous and awful; but that a lord of the house of Cavendish
or Howard, a Duke of Devonshire or Norfolk, or an Earl of Carlisle,
should traffic in boroughs, or exert the most despotic influence as
landlords, _mutato nomine_, he viewed as the mere natural right of
property; and so far was he from loving the pure-hearted and unfactious
champions of liberty, that, in one of his printed works, he dared
to tax Milton with having knowingly, wilfully, deliberately told a
falsehood.[80]

Could Coleridge--was it possible that he could reverence a man
like this? Ordinary men might, because they were told that he had
defended Christianity against the vile blasphemers and impotent
theomachists of the day. But Coleridge had too pure an ideal of a
Christian philosopher, derived from the age of the English Titans
in theology, to share in that estimate. It is singular enough, and
interesting to a man who has ever heard Coleridge talk, but especially
to one who has _assisted_ (to speak in French phrase) at a talking
party between Coleridge and the Bishop, to look back upon an article
in the "Quarterly Review," where, in connexion with the Bishop's
Autobiography, some sneers are dropped with regard to the intellectual
character of the neighbourhood in which he had settled. I have been
told, on pretty good authority, that this article was written by the
late Dr. Whittaker of Craven, the topographical antiquarian; a pretty
sort of person, doubtless, to assume such a tone, in speaking of a
neighbourhood so dazzling in its intellectual pretensions as that
region at that time. Listen, reader, and judge!

The Bishop had fixed his abode on the banks of Windermere. In a small,
but by the necessity of its situation a beautiful park, he had himself
raised a plain, but handsome and substantial mansion; Calgarth, or
Calgarth Park, was its name. Now, at Keswick (I am looking back to the
sneer of the "Quarterly Review") lived Southey; twenty miles distant,
it is true, but still, for a bishop with a bishop's equipage, not
beyond a morning's drive. At Grasmere, about eight miles from Calgarth,
were to be found Wordsworth and Coleridge. At Brathay, about four
miles from Calgarth, lived Charles Lloyd; and he, far as he might be
below the others I have mentioned, could not in candour be considered
a common man. Common! he was a man never to be forgotten! He was
somewhat too _Rousseauish_; but he had, in conversation, the most
extraordinary powers for analysis of a certain kind, applied to the
philosophy of manners, and the most delicate _nuances_ of social life;
and his translation of "Alfieri," together with his own poems, shows
him to have been an accomplished scholar. Then, not much above a mile
from Calgarth, at his beautiful creation of Elleray, lived Professor
Wilson; of whom I need not speak. He, in fact, and Mr. Lloyd were on
the most intimate terms with the Bishop's family. The meanest of these
persons was able to have "taken the conceit" out of Dr. Whittaker and
all his tribe. But even in the town of Kendal, about nine miles from
Calgarth, there were many men of information, at least as extensive as
Dr. Watson's, and amply qualified to have met him upon equal terms in
conversation. Mathematics, it is well known, are extensively cultivated
in the north of England. Sedburgh, for many years, was a sort of
nursery or rural chapel-of-ease to Cambridge. Dawson of Sedburgh was
a luminary better known than ever Dr. Watson was, by mathematicians
both foreign and domestic. Gough, the blind mathematician and botanist
of Kendal, is known to this day; but many others in that town had
accomplishments equal to his; and, indeed, so widely has mathematical
knowledge extended itself throughout Northern England that, even
amongst the poor Lancashire weavers, mechanic labourers for their daily
bread, the cultivation of pure geometry, in the most refined shape, has
long prevailed; of which some accounts have been recently published.
Local pique, therefore, must have been at the bottom of Dr. Whittaker's
sneer. At all events, it was ludicrously contrasted with the true state
of the case, as brought out by the meeting between Coleridge and the
Bishop.

Coleridge was armed, at all points, with the scholastic erudition which
bore upon all questions that could arise in polemic divinity. The
philosophy of ancient Greece, through all its schools, the philosophy
of the schoolmen technically so called, Church history, &c., Coleridge
had within his call. Having been personally acquainted, or connected
as a pupil, with Eichhorn and Michaelis, he knew the whole cycle of
schisms and audacious speculations through which Biblical criticism
or Christian philosophy has revolved in Modern Germany. All this
was ground upon which the Bishop of Llandaff trod with the infirm
footing of a child. He listened to what Coleridge reported with the
same sort of pleasurable surprise, alternating with starts of doubt
or incredulity, as would naturally attend a detailed report from
Laputa--which aërial region of speculation does but too often recur to
a sober-minded person in reading of the endless freaks in philosophy
of Modern Germany, where the sceptre of Mutability, that potentate
celebrated by Spenser, gathers more trophies in a year than elsewhere
in a century; "the anarchy of dreams" presides in her philosophy; and
the restless elements of opinion, throughout every region of debate,
mould themselves eternally, like the billowy sands of the desert
as beheld by Bruce, into towering columns, soar upwards to a giddy
altitude, then stalk about for a minute, all aglow with fiery colour,
and finally unmould and "dislimn," with a collapse as sudden as the
motions of that eddying breeze under which their vapoury architecture
had arisen. Hartley and Locke, both of whom the bishop made into
idols, were discussed; especially the former, against whom Coleridge
alleged some of those arguments which he has used in his "Biographia
Literaria." The bishop made but a feeble defence; and upon some points
none at all. He seemed, I remember, much struck with one remark of
Coleridge's, to this effect:--"That, whereas Hartley fancied that
our very reasoning was an aggregation, collected together under the
law of association, on the contrary, we reason by counteracting that
law: just," said he, "as, in leaping, the law of gravitation concurs
to that act in its latter part; but no leap could take place were it
not by a counteraction of the law." One remark of the bishop's let me
into the secret of his very limited reading. Coleridge had used the
word "apperception," apparently without intention; for, on hearing
some objection to the word, as being "surely not a word that Addison
would have used," he substituted _transcendental consciousness_. Some
months afterwards, going with Charles Lloyd to call at Calgarth, during
the time when "The Friend" was appearing, the bishop again noticed
this obnoxious word, and in the very same terms:--"Now, this word
_apperception_, which Mr. Coleridge uses in the last number of 'The
Friend,' surely, surely it would not have been approved by Addison; no,
Mr. Lloyd, nor by Swift; nor even, I think, by Arbuthnot." Somebody
suggested that the word was a new word of German mintage, and most
probably due to Kant--of whom the bishop seemed never to have heard.
Meantime the fact was, and to me an amusing one, that the word had been
commonly used by Leibnitz, a _classical_ author on such subjects, 120
years before.

In the autumn of 1810, Coleridge left the Lakes; and, so far as I
am aware, for ever. I once, indeed, heard a rumour of his having
passed through with some party of tourists--some reason struck me
at the time for believing it untrue--but, at all events, he never
returned to them as a resident. What might be his reason for this
eternal self-banishment from scenes which he so well understood in all
their shifting forms of beauty, I can only guess. Perhaps it was the
very opposite reason to that which is most obvious: not, possibly,
because he had become indifferent to their attractions, but because
his undecaying sensibility to their commanding power had become
associated with too afflicting remembrances, and flashes of personal
recollections, suddenly restored and illuminated--recollections which
will

               "Sometimes leap
     From hiding-places ten years deep,"

and bring into collision the present with some long-forgotten past, in
a form too trying and too painful for endurance. I have a brilliant
Scotch friend, who cannot walk on the seashore--within sight of its
[Greek: anêrithmon gelasma], the multitudinous laughter of its waves,
or within hearing of its resounding uproar, because they bring up, by
links of old association, too insupportably to his mind the agitations
of his glittering, but too fervid youth. There is a feeling--morbid,
it may be, but for which no anodyne is found in all the schools
from Plato to Kant--to which the human mind is liable at times: it
is best described in a little piece by Henry More, the "Platonist."
He there represents himself as a martyr to his own too passionate
sense of beauty, and his consequent too pathetic sense of its decay.
Everywhere--above, below, around him, in the earth, in the clouds,
in the fields, and in their "garniture of flowers"--he beholds a
beauty carried to excess; and this beauty becomes a source of endless
affliction to him, because everywhere he sees it liable to the touch
of decay and mortal change. During one paroxysm of this sad passion,
an angel appears to comfort him; and, by the sudden revelation of her
immortal beauty, does, in fact, suspend his grief. But it is only a
suspension; for the sudden recollection that her privileged condition,
and her exemption from the general fate of beauty, is only by way of
exception to a universal rule, restores his grief: "And thou thyself,"
he says to the angel--

     "And thou thyself, that com'st to comfort me,
     Wouldst strong occasion of deep sorrow bring,
     If thou wert subject to mortality!"

Every man who has ever dwelt with passionate love upon the fair face
of some female companion through life must have had the same feeling,
and must often, in the exquisite language of Shakspere's sonnets, have
commanded and adjured all-conquering Time, there, at least, and upon
that one tablet of his adoration,

     "To write no wrinkle with his antique hand."

Vain prayer! Empty adjuration! Profitless rebellion against the laws
which season all things for the inexorable grave! Yet not the less
we rebel again and again; and, though wisdom counsels resignation,
yet our human passions, still cleaving to their object, force us
into endless rebellion. Feelings the same in kind as these attach
themselves to our mental power, and our vital energies. Phantoms of
lost power, sudden intuitions, and shadowy restorations of forgotten
feelings, sometimes dim and perplexing, sometimes by bright but furtive
glimpses, sometimes by a full and steady revelation, overcharged with
light--throw us back in a moment upon scenes and remembrances that we
have left full thirty years behind us. In solitude, and chiefly in the
solitudes of nature, and, above all, amongst the great and _enduring_
features of nature, such as mountains, and quiet dells, and the lawny
recesses of forests, and the silent shores of lakes, features with
which (as being themselves less liable to change) our feelings have a
more abiding association--under these circumstances it is that such
evanescent hauntings of our past and forgotten selves are most apt to
startle and to waylay us. These are _positive_ torments from which
the agitated mind shrinks in fear; but there are others _negative_
in their nature--that is, blank mementoes of powers extinct, and of
faculties burnt out within us. And from both forms of anguish--from
this twofold scourge--poor Coleridge fled, perhaps, in flying from the
beauty of external nature. In alluding to this latter, or negative form
of suffering--that form, I mean, which presents not the too fugitive
glimpses of past power, but its blank annihilation--Coleridge himself
most beautifully insists upon and illustrates the truth that all which
we find in Nature must be created by ourselves; and that alike whether
Nature is so gorgeous in her beauty as to seem apparelled in her
wedding-garment or so powerless and extinct as to seem palled in her
shroud. In either case,

     "O, Lady, we receive but what we give,
     And in _our_ life alone does nature _live_;
     Ours is her wedding-garment, ours her shroud.

             It were a vain endeavour,
             Though I should gaze for ever
     On that green light that lingers in the west:
     I may not hope from _outward_ forms to win
     The passion and the life whose fountains are _within_."

This was one, and the most common, shape of extinguished power from
which Coleridge fled to the great city. But sometimes the same decay
came back upon his heart in the more poignant shape of intimations
and vanishing glimpses, recovered for one moment from the paradise
of youth, and from fields of joy and power, over which, for him, too
certainly, he felt that the cloud of night was settling for ever.
Both modes of the same torment exiled him from nature; and for the
same reasons he fled from poetry and all commerce with his own soul;
burying himself in the profoundest abstractions from life and human
sensibilities.

     "For not to think of what I needs must feel,
         But to be still and patient all I can;
     And haply _by abstruse research to steal_,
      _From my own nature, all the natural man_;
         This was my sole resource, my only plan;
     Till _that_, which suits a part, infects the whole,
     And now is almost grown the habit of my soul."

Such were, doubtless, the true and radical causes which, for the final
twenty-four years of Coleridge's life, drew him away from those scenes
of natural beauty in which only, at an earlier stage of life, he found
strength and restoration. These scenes still survived; but their power
was gone, because _that_ had been derived from himself, and his ancient
self had altered. Such were the _causes_; but the immediate _occasion_
of his departure from the Lakes, in the autumn of 1810, was the
favourable opportunity then presented to him of migrating in a pleasant
way. Mr. Basil Montagu, the Chancery barrister, happened at that time
to be returning to London, with Mrs. Montagu, from a visit to the
Lakes, or to Wordsworth.[81] His travelling carriage was roomy enough
to allow of his offering Coleridge a seat in it; and his admiration of
Coleridge was just then fervent enough to prompt a friendly wish for
that sort of close connexion (viz. by domestication as a guest under
Mr. Basil Montagu's roof) which is the most trying to friendship,
and which in this instance led to a perpetual rupture of it. The
domestic habits of eccentric men of genius, much more those of a man so
irreclaimably irregular as Coleridge, can hardly be supposed to promise
very auspiciously for any connexion so close as this. A very extensive
house and household, together with the unlimited licence of action
which belongs to the _ménage_ of some great Dons amongst the nobility,
could alone have made Coleridge an inmate perfectly desirable. Probably
many little jealousies and offences had been mutually suppressed; but
the particular spark which at length fell amongst the combustible
materials already prepared, and thus produced the final explosion,
took the following shape:--Mr. Montagu had published a book against
the use of wine and intoxicating liquors of every sort.[82] Not out
of parsimony or under any suspicion of inhospitality, but in mere
self-consistency and obedience to his own conscientious scruples, Mr.
Montagu would not countenance the use of wine at his own table. So
far all was right. But doubtless, on such a system, under the known
habits of modern life, it should have been made a rule to ask no man
to dinner: for to force men, without warning, to a _single_ (and,
therefore, thoroughly useless) act of painful abstinence, is what
neither I nor any man can have a right to do. In point of sense, it is,
in fact, precisely the freak of Sir Roger de Coverley, who drenches his
friend the "Spectator" with a hideous decoction: not, as his confiding
visitor had supposed, for some certain and immediate benefit to follow,
but simply as having a _tendency_ (if well supported by many years'
continuance of similar drenches) to abate the remote contingency of the
stone. Hear this, ye Gods of the Future! I am required to perform a
most difficult sacrifice; and forty years hence I _may_, by persisting
so long, have some dim chance of reward. One day's abstinence could
do no good on _any_ scheme: and no man was likely to offer himself
for a second. However, such being the law of the castle, and that law
well known to Coleridge, he nevertheless, thought fit to ask to dinner
Colonel (then Captain) Pasley, of the Engineers, well known in those
days for his book on the "Military Policy of England," and since for
his "System of Professional Instruction." Now, where or in what land
abides that

     "Captain, or Colonel, or Knight-in-arms,"

to whom wine in the analysis of dinner is a neutral or indifferent
element? Wine, therefore, as it was not of a nature to be omitted,
Coleridge took care to furnish at his own private cost. And so far,
again, all was right. But why must Coleridge give his dinner to the
captain in Mr. Montagu's house? There lay the affront; and, doubtless,
it was a very inconsiderate action on the part of Coleridge. I report
the case simply as it was then generally borne upon the breath, not of
scandal, but of jest and merriment. The result, however, was no jest;
for bitter words ensued--words that festered in the remembrance; and a
rupture between the parties followed, which no reconciliation has ever
healed.

Meantime, on reviewing this story, as generally adopted by the learned
in literary scandal, one demur rises up. Dr. Parr, a lisping Whig
pedant, without personal dignity or conspicuous power of mind, was
a frequent and privileged inmate at Mr. Montagu's. Him now--this
Parr--there was no conceivable motive for enduring; that point is
satisfactorily settled by the pompous inanities of his works. Yet, on
the other hand, his habits were in their own nature far less endurable
than Samuel Taylor Coleridge's; for the monster smoked;--and how? How
did the "Birmingham Doctor"[83] smoke? Not as you, or I, or other
civilized people smoke, with a gentle cigar--but with the very coarsest
tobacco. And those who know how that abomination lodges and nestles in
the draperies of window-curtains will guess the horror and detestation
in which the old Whig's memory is held by all enlightened women.
Surely, in a house where the Doctor had any toleration at all, Samuel
Taylor Coleridge might have enjoyed an unlimited toleration.[84]

From Mr. Montagu's Coleridge passed, by favour of what introduction
I never heard, into a family as amiable in manners and as benign in
disposition as I remember to have ever met with. On this excellent
family I look back with threefold affection, on account of their
goodness to Coleridge, and because they were then unfortunate, and
because their union has long since been dissolved by death. The family
was composed of three members: of Mr. M----, once a lawyer, who had,
however, ceased to practise; of Mrs. M----, his wife, a blooming
young woman, distinguished for her fine person; and a young lady, her
unmarried sister.[85] Here, for some years, I used to visit Coleridge;
and, doubtless, as far as situation merely, and the most delicate
attentions from the most amiable women, _could_ make a man happy, he
must have been so at this time; for both the ladies treated him as
an elder brother, or as a father. At length, however, the cloud of
misfortune, which had long settled upon the prospects of this excellent
family, thickened; and I found, upon one of my visits to London, that
they had given up their house in Berners Street, and had retired to
a cottage in Wiltshire. Coleridge had accompanied them; and there I
visited them myself, and, as it eventually proved, for the last time.
Some time after this, I heard from Coleridge, with the deepest sorrow,
that poor M---- had been thrown into prison, and had sunk under the
pressure of his misfortunes. The gentle ladies of his family had
retired to remote friends; and I saw them no more, though often vainly
making inquiries about them.

Coleridge, during this part of his London life, I saw
constantly--generally once a day, during my own stay in London; and
sometimes we were jointly engaged to dinner parties. In particular, I
remember one party at which we met Lady Hamilton--Lord Nelson's Lady
Hamilton--the beautiful, the accomplished, the enchantress! Coleridge
admired her, as who would not have done, prodigiously; and she, in
her turn, was fascinated with Coleridge. He was unusually effective
in his display; and she, by way of expressing her acknowledgments
appropriately, performed a scene in Lady Macbeth--how splendidly, I
cannot better express than by saying that all of us who then witnessed
her performance were familiar with Mrs. Siddons's matchless execution
of that scene, and yet, with such a model filling our imaginations, we
could not but acknowledge the possibility of another, and a different
perfection, without a trace of imitation, equally original, and
equally astonishing. The word "magnificent" is, in this day, most
lavishly abused: daily I hear or read in the newspapers of magnificent
objects, as though scattered more thickly than blackberries; but for
my part I have seen few objects really deserving that epithet. Lady
Hamilton was one of them. She had Medea's beauty, and Medea's power of
enchantment. But let not the reader too credulously suppose her the
unprincipled woman she has been described. I know of no sound reason
for supposing the connexion between Lord Nelson and her to have been
other than perfectly virtuous. Her public services, I am sure, were
most eminent--for _that_ we have indisputable authority; and equally
sure I am that they were requited with rank ingratitude.

After the household of the poor M----s had been dissolved, I know not
whither Coleridge went immediately: for I did not visit London until
some years had elapsed. In 1823-24 I first understood that he had taken
up his residence as a guest with Mr. Gillman, a surgeon, in Highgate.
He had then probably resided for some time at that gentleman's: there
he continued to reside on the same terms, I believe, of affectionate
friendship with the members of Mr. Gillman's family as had made life
endurable to him in the time of the M----s; and there he died in July
of the present year. If, generally speaking, poor Coleridge had but
a small share of earthly prosperity, in one respect at least he was
eminently favoured by Providence: beyond all men who ever perhaps have
lived, he found means to engage a constant succession of most faithful
friends; and he levied the services of sisters, brothers, daughters,
sons, from the hands of strangers--attracted to him by no possible
impulses but those of reverence for his intellect, and love for his
gracious nature. How, says Wordsworth--

     ----"How can _he_ expect that others should
     Sow for him, reap for _him_, and at his call
     Love him, who for himself will take no thought at all?"

How can he, indeed? It is most unreasonable to do so: yet this
expectation, if Coleridge ought not to have entertained, at all events
he realized. Fast as one friend dropped off, another, and another,
succeeded: perpetual relays were laid along his path in life, of
judicious and zealous supporters, who comforted his days, and smoothed
the pillow for his declining age, even when it was beyond all human
power to take away the thorns which stuffed it.

And what _were_ those thorns?--and whence derived? That is a question
on which I ought to decline speaking, unless I could speak fully. Not,
however, to make any mystery of what requires none, the reader will
understand that _originally_ his sufferings, and the death within
him of all hope--the palsy, as it were, of that which is the life of
life, and the heart within the heart--came from opium. But two things
I must add--one to explain Coleridge's case, and the other to bring
it within the indulgent allowance of equitable judges:--_First_, the
sufferings from morbid derangements, originally produced by opium, had
very possibly lost that simple character, and had themselves re-acted
in producing secondary states of disease and irritation, not any longer
dependent upon the opium, so as to disappear with its disuse: hence,
a more than mortal discouragement to accomplish this disuse, when the
pains of self-sacrifice were balanced by no gleams of restorative
feeling. Yet, _secondly_, Coleridge did make prodigious efforts to
deliver himself from this thraldom; and he went so far at one time in
Bristol, to my knowledge, as to hire a man for the express purpose,
and armed with the power of resolutely interposing between himself and
the door of any druggist's shop. It is true that an authority derived
only from Coleridge's will could not be valid against Coleridge's own
counter-determination: he could resume as easily as he could delegate
the power. But the scheme did not entirely fail; a man shrinks from
exposing to another that infirmity of will which he might else have but
a feeble motive for disguising to himself; and the delegated man, the
external conscience, as it were, of Coleridge, though destined--in the
final resort, if matters came to absolute rupture, and to an obstinate
duel, as it were, between himself and his principal--in that extremity
to give way, yet might have long protracted the struggle before coming
to that sort of _dignus vindice nodus_: and in fact, I know, upon
absolute proof, that, before reaching that crisis, the man showed
fight, and, faithful to his trust, and comprehending the reasons for
it, declared that, if he must yield, he would "know the reason why."

Opium, therefore, subject to the explanation I have made, was certainly
the original source of Coleridge's morbid feelings, of his debility,
and of his remorse. His pecuniary embarrassments pressed as lightly
as could well be expected upon him. I have mentioned the annuity of
£150 made to him by the two Wedgwoods. One half, I believe, could not
be withdrawn, having been left by a regular testamentary bequest. But
the other moiety, coming from the surviving brother, was withdrawn on
the plea of commercial losses, somewhere, I think, about 1815. That
would have been a heavy blow to Coleridge; and assuredly the generosity
is not very conspicuous of having ever suffered an allowance of that
nature to be left to the mercy of accident. Either it ought not to
have been granted in that shape--viz. as an _annual_ allowance, giving
ground for expecting its periodical recurrence--or it ought not to
have been withdrawn. However, this blow was broken to Coleridge by the
bounty of George IV, who placed Coleridge's name in the list of twelve
to whom he granted an annuity of 100 guineas per annum. This he enjoyed
so long as that Prince reigned. But at length came a heavier blow than
that from Mr. Wedgwood: a new King arose, who knew not Joseph. Yet
surely _he_ was not a King who could so easily resolve to turn adrift
twelve men of letters, many of them most accomplished men, for the sake
of appropriating a sum no larger to himself than 1200 guineas--no less
to some of them than the total freight of their earthly hopes?--No
matter: let the deed have been from whose hand it might, it was
done: [Greek: heirgastai], it was perpetrated, as saith the Medea of
Euripides; and it will be mentioned hereafter, "more than either once
or twice." It fell with weight, and with effect upon the latter days
of Coleridge; it took from him as much heart and hope as at his years,
and with his unworldly prospects, remained for man to blight: and, if
it did not utterly crush him, the reason was--because for himself he
had never needed much, and was now continually drawing near to that
haven in which, for himself, he would need nothing; secondly, because
his children were now independent of his aid; and, finally, because in
this land there are men to be found always of minds large enough to
comprehend the claims of genius, and with hearts, by good luck, more
generous, by infinite degrees, than the hearts of Princes.

Coleridge, as I now understand, was somewhere about sixty-two years
of age when he died.[86] This, however, I take upon the report of the
public newspapers; for I do not, of my own knowledge, know anything
accurately upon that point.

It can hardly be necessary to inform any reader of discernment or
of much practice in composition that the whole of this article
upon Mr. Coleridge, though carried through at intervals, and (as
it has unexpectedly happened) with time sufficient to have made it
a very careful one, has, in fact, been written in a desultory and
unpremeditated style. It was originally undertaken on the sudden
but profound impulse communicated to the writer's feelings by the
unexpected news of this great man's death; partly, therefore, to
relieve, by expressing, his own deep sentiments of reverential
affection to his memory, and partly, in however imperfect a way, to
meet the public feeling of interest or curiosity about a man who had
long taken his place amongst the intellectual _potentates_ of the age.
Both purposes required that it should be written almost _extempore_:
the greater part was really and unaffectedly written in that way,
and under circumstances of such extreme haste as would justify the
writer in pleading the very amplest privilege of licence and indulgent
construction which custom concedes to such cases. Hence it had occurred
to the writer, as a judicious principle, to create a sort of merit out
of his own necessity, and rather to seek after the graces which belong
to the epistolary form, or to other modes of composition professedly
careless, than after those which grow out of preconceived biographies,
which, having originally settled their plan upon a regular foundation,
are able to pursue a course of orderly development, such as _his_
slight sketch had voluntarily renounced from the beginning. That mode
of composition having been once adopted, it seemed proper to sustain
it, even after delays and interruption had allowed time for throwing
the narrative into a more orderly movement, and modulating it, as
it were, into a key of the usual solemnity. The _qualis ab incepto
processerit_--the _ordo_ prescribed by the first bars of the music
predominated over all other considerations, and to such an extent that
he had purposed to leave the article without any regular termination or
summing up--as, on the one hand, scarcely demanded by the character of
a sketch so rapid and indigested, whilst, on the other, he was sensible
that anything of so much pretension as a formal peroration challenged
a sort of consideration to the paper which it was the author's chief
wish to disclaim. That effect, however, is sufficiently parried by the
implied protest now offered; and, on other reasons, it is certainly
desirable that a general glance, however cursory, should be thrown over
the intellectual claims of Mr. Coleridge by one who knew him so well,
and especially in a case where those very claims constitute the entire
and sole justification of the preceding personal memoir. That which
furnishes the whole moving reason for any separate notice at all, and
forms its whole latent interest, ought not, in mere logic, to be left
without some notice itself, though as rapidly executed as the previous
biographical sketch, and, from the necessity of the subject, by many
times over more imperfect.

To this task, therefore, the writer now addresses himself; and by
way of gaining greater freedom of movement and of resuming his
conversational tone, he will here again take the liberty of speaking in
the first person.

If Mr. Coleridge had been merely a scholar--merely a philologist--or
merely a man of science--there would be no reason apparent for
travelling in our survey beyond the field of his intellect, rigorously
and narrowly so called. But, because he was a poet, and because he was
a philosopher in a comprehensive and a most _human_ sense, with whose
functions the moral nature is so largely interwoven, I shall feel
myself entitled to notice the most striking aspects of his _character_
(using that word in its common limited meaning), of his disposition,
and his manners, as so many reflex indications of his intellectual
constitution. But let it be well understood that I design nothing
elaborate, nothing comprehensive or ambitious: my purpose is merely to
supply a few hints and suggestions drawn from a very hasty retrospect,
by way of adding a few traits to any outline which the reader may have
framed to himself, either from some personal knowledge, or from more
full and lively memorials.

One character in which Mr. Coleridge most often came before the public
was that of politician. In this age of fervent partisanship, it will,
therefore, naturally occur as a first question to inquire after his
party and political connexions: was he Whig, Tory, or Radical? Or,
under a new classification, were his propensities Conservative or
Reforming? I answer that, in any exclusive or emphatic sense, he
was none of these; because, as a philosopher, he was, according to
circumstances, and according to the object concerned, all of these by
turns. These are distinctions upon which a cloud of delusion rests.
It would not be difficult to show that in the speculations built upon
the distinction of Whig and Tory, even by as philosophic a politician
as Edmund Burke, there is an oversight of the largest practical
importance. But the general and partisan use of these terms superadds
to this [Greek: prôton pseudos] a second which is much more flagrant.
It is this: the terms Whig or Tory, used by partisans, are taken _extra
gradum_, as expressing the ideal or extreme cases of the several
creeds; whereas, in actual life, few such cases are found realized,
by far the major part of those who answer to either one or the other
denomination making only an approximation (differing by infinite
degrees) to the ideal or abstract type. A third error there is,
relating to the actual extent of the several denominations, even after
every allowance made for the faintest approximations. Listen to a Whig,
or to a Tory, and you will suppose that the great bulk of society range
under his banner: all, at least, who have any property at stake. Listen
to a Radical, and you will suppose that all are marshalled in the same
ranks with himself, unless those who have some private interest in
existing abuses, or have aristocratic privileges to defend. Yet, upon
going extensively into society as it is, you find that a vast majority
of good citizens are of no party whatsoever, own no party designation,
care for no party interest, but carry their good wishes by turns to men
of every party, according to the momentary purpose they are pursuing.
As to Whig and Tory, it is pretty clear that only two classes of men,
both of limited extent, acknowledge these as their distinctions:
first, those who make politics in some measure their profession or
trade--whether by standing forward habitually in public meetings as
leaders or as assistants, or by writing books and pamphlets in the same
cause; secondly, those whose rank, or birth, or position in a city,
or a rural district, almost pledges them to a share in the political
struggles of the day, under the penalty of being held _fainéans_,
truants, or even malignant recusants, if they should decline a warfare
which often, perhaps, they do not love in secret. These classes, which,
after all, are not numerous, and not entirely sincere, compose the
whole extent of professing Whigs and Tories who make any approach to
the standards of their two churches; and, generally speaking, these
persons have succeeded to their politics and their party ties, as they
have to their estates, viz. by inheritance. Not their way of thinking
in politics has dictated their party connexions; but these connexions,
traditionally bequeathed from one generation to another, have dictated
their politics. With respect to the Radical or the Reformer, the case
is otherwise; for it is certain that in this, as in every great and
enlightened nation, enjoying an intense and fervid communication of
thought through the press, there is, and must be, a tendency widely
diffused to the principles of sane reform--an anxiety to probe and
examine all the institutions of the land by the increasing lights
of the age--and a salutary determination that no acknowledged abuse
shall be sheltered by prescription, or privileged by its antiquity. In
saying, therefore, that _his_ principles are spread over the length
and breadth of the land, the Reformer says no more than the truth.
_Whig_ and _Tory_, as usually understood, express only two modes of
aristocratic partisanship: and it is strange, indeed, to find people
deluded by the notion that the reforming principle has any more natural
connexion with the first than the last. _Reformer_, on the other hand,
to a certain extent expresses the political creed and aspect of almost
every enlightened citizen: but, then, how? Not, as the _Radical_ would
insinuate, as pledging a man to a specific set of objects, or to any
visible and apparent party, having known leaders and settled modes of
action. British society, in its large majority, may be fairly described
as _Reformers_, in the sense of being favourably disposed to a general
spirit of ventilation and reform carried through all departments of
public business, political or judicial; but it is so far from being,
therefore, true that men in general are favourably disposed to any
known party, in or out of Parliament, united for certain objects and by
certain leaders, that, on the contrary, this reforming party itself has
no fixed unity, and no generally acknowledged heads. It is divided both
as to persons and as to things: the ends to be pursued create as many
schisms as the course of means proper for the pursuit, and the choice
of agents for conducting the public wishes. In fact, it would be even
more difficult to lay down the ideal standard of a Reformer, or his
abstract creed, than of a Tory: and, supposing this done, it would be
found, in practice, that the imperfect approximations to the pure faith
would differ by even broader shades as regarded the reforming creed
than as regarded that of the rigorous or ultra Tory.

With respect to Mr. Coleridge: he was certainly a friend to all
enlightened reforms; he was a friend, for example, to Reform in
Parliament. Sensible as he was of the prodigious diffusion of knowledge
and good sense amongst the classes immediately below the gentry in
British society, he could not but acknowledge their right to a larger
and a less indirect share of political influence. As to the plan, and
its extent, and its particular provisions,--upon those he hesitated
and wavered; as other friends to the same views have done, and will
continue to do. The only _avowed_ objects of modern Reformers which he
would strenuously have opposed, nay, would have opposed with the zeal
of an ancient martyr, are those which respect the Church of England,
and, therefore, most of those which respect the two Universities of
Oxford and Cambridge. There he would have been found in the first ranks
of the Anti-Reformers. He would also have supported the House of
Peers, as the tried bulwark of our social interests in many a famous
struggle, and sometimes, in the hour of need, the sole barrier against
despotic aggressions on the one hand, and servile submissions on the
other. Moreover, he looked with favour upon many modes of aristocratic
influence as balances to new-made commercial wealth, and to a far
baser tyranny likely to arise from that quarter when unbalanced. But,
allowing for these points of difference, I know of little else stamped
with the general seal of modern reform, and claiming to be a privileged
object for a national effort, which would not have had his countenance.
It is true,--and this I am sensible will be objected,--that his party
connexions were chiefly with the Tories; and it adds a seeming strength
to this objection, that these connexions were not those of accident,
nor those which he inherited, nor those of his youthful choice. They
were sought out by himself, and in his maturer years; or else they were
such as sought _him_ for the sake of his political principles; and
equally, in either case, they argued some affinity in his political
creed. This much cannot be denied. But one consideration will serve
greatly to qualify the inference from these facts. In those years when
Mr. Coleridge became connected with Tories, what was the predominating
and cardinal principle of Toryism, in comparison with which all else
was willingly slighted? Circumstances of position had thrown upon the
Tories the _onus_ of a great national struggle, the greatest which
History anywhere records, and with an enemy the most deadly. The Whigs
were then out of power: they were therefore in opposition; and that
one fact, the simple fact, of holding an anti-ministerial position,
they allowed, by a most fatal blunder, to determine the course of
their foreign politics. Napoleon was to be cherished simply because he
was a thorn in Mr. Pitt's side. So began their foreign policy--and in
that pettiest of personal views. Because they were anti-ministerial,
they allowed themselves passively to become anti-national. To be a
Whig, therefore, in those days, implied little more than a strenuous
opposition to foreign war; to be a Tory pledged a man to little
more than war with Napoleon Bonaparte. And this view of our foreign
relations it was that connected Coleridge with Tories,--a view which
arose upon no motives of selfish interest (as too often has been said
in reproach), but upon the changes wrought in the spirit of the French
Republic, which gradually transmuted its defensive warfare (framed
originally to meet a conspiracy of kings crusading against the new-born
democracy of French institutions, whilst yet in their cradle) into a
warfare of aggression and sanguinary ambition. The military strength
evoked in France by the madness of European kings had taught her the
secret of her own power--a secret too dangerous for a nation of vanity
so infinite, and so feeble in all means of moral self-restraint.
The temptation to foreign conquest was too strong for the national
principles; and, in this way, all that had been grand and pure in the
early pretensions of French Republicanism rapidly melted away before
the common bribes of vulgar ambition. Unoffending states, such as
Switzerland, were the first to be trampled under foot; no voice was
heard any more but the "brazen throat of war"; and, after all that
had been vaunted of a golden age, and a long career opened to the
sceptre of pure political justice, the clouds gathered more gloomily
than ever; and the sword was once more reinstated, as the sole arbiter
of right, with less disguise and less reserve than under the vilest
despotism of kings. The change was in the French Republicans, not in
their foreign admirers; they, in mere consistency, were compelled
into corresponding changes, and into final alienation of sympathy, as
they beheld, one after one, all titles forfeited by which that grand
explosion of pure democracy had originally challenged and sustained
their veneration. The mighty Republic had now begun to revolve through
those fierce transmigrations foreseen by Burke, to every one of which,
by turns, he had denounced an inevitable "purification by fire and
blood": no trace remained of her primitive character: and of that awful
outbreak of popular might which once had made France the land of hope
and promise to the whole human race, and had sounded a knell to every
form of oppression or abuse, no record was to be found, except in the
stupendous power which cemented its martial oligarchy. Of the people,
of the democracy--or that it had ever for an hour been roused from its
slumbers--one sole evidence remained; and that lay in the blank power
of destruction, and its perfect organization, which none but a popular
movement, no power short of that, could have created. The people,
having been unchained, and as if for the single purpose of creating
a vast system of destroying energies, had then immediately recoiled
within their old limits, and themselves become the earliest victim
of their own stratocracy. In this way France had become an object of
jealousy and alarm. It remained to see to what purpose she would apply
her new energies. That was soon settled; her new-born power was wielded
from the first by unprincipled and by ambitious men; and, in 1800,
it fell under the permanent control of an autocrat, whose unity of
purpose, and iron will, left no room for any hope of change.

Under these circumstances, under these prospects, coupled with this
retrospect, what became the duty of all foreign politicians? of
the English above all, as natural leaders in any hopeful scheme of
resistance? The question can scarcely be put with decency. Time and
season, place or considerations of party, all alike vanished before
an elementary duty to the human race, which much transcended any
duty of exclusive patriotism. Plant it, however, on that narrower
basis, and the answer would have been the same for all centuries,
and for every land under a corresponding state of circumstances. Of
Napoleon's real purposes there cannot _now_ be any reasonable doubt.
His confessions--and, in particular, his indirect revelations at St.
Helena--have long since removed all demurs or scruples of scepticism.
For England, therefore, as in relation to a man bent upon her ruin,
all distinctions of party were annihilated--Whig and Tory were merged
and swallowed up in the transcendent duties of patriots, Englishmen,
lovers of liberty. Tories, _as_ Tories, had here no peculiar or
separate duties--none which belonged to their separate creed in
politics. Their duties were paramount; and their partisanship had
here no application--was perfectly indifferent, and spoke neither
this way nor that. In one respect only they had peculiar duties, and
a peculiar responsibility; peculiar, however, not by any difference
of quality, but in its supreme degree; the same duties which belonged
to all, belonged to them by a heavier responsibility. And how, or
why? Not _as_ Tories had they, or could they have, any functions at
all applying to this occasion; it was as being then the ministerial
party, as the party accidentally in power at the particular crisis: in
_that_ character it was that they had any separate or higher degree
of responsibility; otherwise, and as to the _kind_ of their duty
apart from this degree, the Tories stood in the same circumstances
as men of all other parties. To the Tories, however, as accidentally
in possession of the supreme power, and wielding the national forces
at that time, and directing their application--to them it was that
the honour belonged of making a beginning: on them had devolved
the privilege of opening and authorizing the dread crusade. How
and in what spirit they acquitted themselves of that most enviable
task--enviable for its sanctity, fearful for the difficulty of its
adequate fulfilment--how they persevered, and whether, at any crisis,
the direst and most ominous to the righteous cause, they faltered or
gave sign of retreating--History will tell--History has already told.
To the Whigs belonged the duty of seconding their old antagonists:
and no wise man could have doubted that, in a case of transcendent
patriotism, where none of those principles could possibly apply by
which the two parties were divided and distinguished, the Whigs would
be anxious to show that, for the interests of their common country,
they could cheerfully lay aside all those party distinctions, and
forget those feuds which now had no pertinence or meaning. Simply as
Whigs, had they stood in no other relation, they probably would have
done so. Unfortunately, however, for their own good name and popularity
in after times, they were divided from the other party, not merely as
Whigs opposed to Tories, but also upon another and a more mortifying
distinction, which was not, like the first, a mere inert question of
speculation or theory, but involved a vast practical difference of
honours and emoluments:--they were divided, I say, on another and
more vexatious principle, as the _Outs_ opposed to the _Ins_. Simply
as Whigs, they might have coalesced with the Tories _quoad hoc_, and
merely for this one purpose. But, as men _out_ of power, they could
not coalesce with those who were _in_. They constituted "his Majesty's
Opposition"; and, in a fatal hour, they determined that it was fitting
to carry their general scheme of hostility even into this sacred and
privileged ground. That resolution once taken, they found it necessary
to pursue it with zeal. The case itself was too weighty and too
interesting to allow of any moderate tone for the abetters or opposers.
Passion and personal bitterness soon animated the contest: violent
and rash predictions were hazarded--prophecies of utter ruin and of
captivity for our whole army were solemnly delivered: and it soon
became evident, as indeed mere human infirmity made it beforehand but
too probable, that, where so much personal credit was at stake upon the
side of our own national dishonour, the wishes of the prophet had been
pledged to the same result as the credit of his political sagacity.
Many were the melancholy illustrations of the same general case. Men
were seen fighting against the evidences of some great British victory
with all the bitterness and fierce incredulity which usually meet the
first rumours of some private calamity: that was in effect the aspect
in their eyes of each national triumph in its turn. Their position,
connected with the unfortunate election made by the Whig leaders of
their tone, from the very opening of the contest, gave the character of
a calamity for them and for their party to that which to every other
heart in Britain was the noblest of triumphs in the noblest of causes;
and, as a party, the Whigs mourned for years over those events which
quickened the pulses of pleasure and sacred exultation in every other
heart. God forbid that all Whigs should have felt in this unnatural
way! I speak only of the tone set by the Parliamentary leaders. The
few who were in Parliament, and exposed to daily taunts from the just
exultation of their irritated opponents, had their natural feelings
poisoned and envenomed. The many who were out of Parliament, and not
personally interested in this warfare of the Houses, were left open to
natural influences of patriotic pride, and to the contagion of public
sympathy: and these, though Whigs, felt as became them.

These are things too unnatural to be easily believed, or, in a land
where the force of partisanship is less, to be easily understood. Being
true, however, they ought not to be forgotten: and at present it is
almost necessary that they should be stated for the justification of
Coleridge. Too much has been written upon this part of his life, and
too many reproaches thrown out upon his levity or his want of principle
in his supposed sacrifice of his early political connexions, to make
it possible for any reverencer of Coleridge's memory to pass over the
case without a full explanation. That explanation is involved in the
strange and scandalous conduct of the Parliamentary Whigs. Coleridge
passed over to the Tories only in that sense in which all patriots did
so at that time, and in relation to our great _foreign_ interest--viz.
by refusing to accompany the Whigs in their almost perfidious demeanour
towards Napoleon Bonaparte. Anti-_ministerial_ they affect to style
their policy, but in the most eminent sense it was anti-_national_. It
was thus far--viz. exclusively, or almost exclusively, in relation to
our great feud with Napoleon--that Coleridge adhered to the Tories.
But, because this feud was so capital and so earth-shaking a quarrel
that it occupied all hearts and all the councils of Christendom,
suffering no other question almost to live in its neighbourhood, hence
it happened that he who acceded to the Tories in this one chapter
of their policy was regarded as an ally in the most general sense.
Domestic politics were then, in fact, forgotten; no question, in any
proper sense a Tory one, ever arose in that era; or, if it had, the
public attention would not have settled upon it, and it would speedily
have been dismissed.

_Hence_ I deduce as a possibility, and, from my knowledge of Coleridge,
I deduce it as a fact, that his adhesion to the Tories was bounded by
his approbation of their foreign policy; and even of _that_ rarely in
its executive details, rarely even in its military plans (for these he
assailed with more keenness of criticism than to me the case seemed
to justify), but solely in its animating principle, its moving and
sustaining force, viz. the doctrine and entire faith that Napoleon
Bonaparte ought to be resisted, was not a proper object of diplomacy or
negotiation, and could be resisted hopefully and triumphantly. Thus far
he went along with the Tories: in all else he belonged quite as much
to other parties--so far as he belonged to any. And that he did not
follow any bias of private interest in connecting himself with Tories,
or rather in allowing Tories to connect themselves with him, appears
(rather more indeed than it ought to have appeared) on the very surface
of his life. From Tory munificence he drew nothing at all, unless it
should be imputed to his Tory connexions that George IV selected him
for one of his academicians. But this slight mark of royal favour he
owed, I believe, to other considerations; and I have reason to think
that this way of treating political questions, so wide of dogmatism,
and laying open so vast a field to scepticism that might else have
gone unregarded, must have been held as evidence of too latitudinarian
a creed to justify a title to Toryism. And, upon the whole, I am of
opinion that few events of Mr. Coleridge's life were better calculated
to place his disinterested pursuit of truth in a luminous aspect. In
fact, his carelessness of all worldly interests was too notorious to
leave him open to suspicions of that nature: nor was this carelessness
kept within such limits as to be altogether meritorious. There is no
doubt that his indolence concurred, in some degree, to that line of
conduct and to that political reserve which would, at all events, have
been pursued, in a degree beyond what honour the severest, or delicacy
the most nervous, could have enjoined.

It is a singular anecdote, after all, to report of Coleridge, who
incurred the reproach of having _ratted_ solely by his inability to
follow the friends of his early days into what his heart regarded as a
monstrous and signal breach of patriotism, that in any eminent sense he
was _not_ a patriot. His understanding, in this, as in many instances,
was too active, too restless, for any abiding feelings to lay hold of
him, unless when they coincided with some palpable command of nature.
Parental love, for instance, was too holy a thing to be submitted
for an instant to any scrutiny or any jealousy of his hair-splitting
understanding. But it must be something as sacred and as profound as
that which with Coleridge could long support the endless attrition of
his too active intellect. In this instance, he had the same defect,
derived in part from the same cause, as a contemporary, one of the
idols of the day, more celebrated, and more widely celebrated, than
Coleridge, but far his inferior in power and compass of intellect.
I speak of Goethe: he also was defective, and defective under far
stronger provocations and excitement, in patriotic feeling. He cared
little for Weimar, and less for Germany. And he was, thus far, much
below Coleridge--that the passion which he could not feel Coleridge
yet obliged himself practically to obey in all things which concerned
the world, whereas Goethe disowned this passion equally in his acts,
his words, and his writings. Both are now gone--Goethe and Coleridge;
both are honoured by those who knew them, and by multitudes who did
not. But the honours of Coleridge are perennial, and will annually grow
more verdant; whilst from those of Goethe every generation will see
something fall away, until posterity will wonder at the subverted idol,
whose basis, being hollow and unsound, will leave the worship of their
fathers an enigma to their descendants.

With respect to the comparatively trivial case of Pythagoras, an
author of great distinction in literature and in the Anglican Church
has professed himself unable to understand what room there could be
for plagiarism in a case where the solution ascribed to Coleridge
was amongst the commonplaces of ordinary English academic tuition.
Locally this may have been so; but hardly, I conceive, in so large
an extent as to make that solution _publici juris_. Yet, however
this may be, no help is given to Coleridge; since, according to Mr.
Poole's story, whether the interpretation of the riddle were or were
_not_ generally diffused, Coleridge claimed it for his own.--[In Mrs.
Sandford's _Thomas Poole and his Friends_ (1888), vol. ii. pp. 304-6,
there is printed a letter of Mr. Poole's, dated June 1835, doubting the
accuracy of De Quincey's story of their discourse in 1807, respecting
Coleridge's plagiarisms.--M.]

Finally--for distance from the press and other inconveniences of
unusual pressure oblige me to wind up suddenly--the whole spirit of my
record at the time (twenty years ago), and in particular the special
allusion to the last Duke of Ancaster's case, as one which ran parallel
to Coleridge's, involving the same propensity to appropriate what
generally were trifles in the midst of enormous and redundant wealth,
survives as an indication of the _animus_ with which I approached this
subject, starting even from the assumption that I was bound to consider
myself under the restraints of friendship--which, for the second time
let me repeat, I was _not_. In reality, the notes contributed to the
Aldine edition of the "Biographia Literaria," by Coleridge's admirable
daughter, have placed this whole subject in a new light; and, in doing
this, have unavoidably reflected some degree of justification upon
myself. Too much so, I understand to be the feeling in some quarters.
This lamented lady is thought to have shown partialities in her
distributions of praise and blame upon this subject. I will not here
enter into that discussion. But, as respects the justification of her
father, I regard her mode of argument as unassailable. Filial piety the
most tender never was so finely reconciled with candour towards the
fiercest of his antagonists. Wherever the plagiarism was undeniable,
she has allowed it; whilst palliating its faultiness by showing the
circumstances under which it arose. But she has also opened a new view
of other circumstances under which an apparent plagiarism arose that
was not real. I myself, for instance, knew cases where Coleridge gave
to young ladies a copy of verses, headed thus--"Lines on----, from the
German of Hölty." Other young ladies made transcripts of these lines;
and, caring nothing for the German authorship, naturally fathered
them upon Coleridge, the translator. These lines were subsequently
circulated as Coleridge's, and as if on Coleridge's own authority. Thus
arose many cases of apparent plagiarism. And, lastly, as his daughter
most truly reports, if he took--he gave. Continually he fancied other
men's thoughts his own; but such were the confusions of his memory that
continually, and with even greater liberality, he ascribed his own
thoughts to others.

In 1807 it was, at the beginning of winter, that I first saw William
Wordsworth. I have already mentioned[89] that I had introduced myself
to his notice by letter as early as the spring of 1803. To this hour
it has continued, I believe, a mystery to Wordsworth why it was that
I suffered an interval of four and a half years to slip away before
availing myself of the standing invitation with which I had been
honoured to the poet's house. Very probably he accounted for this
delay by supposing that the new-born liberty of an Oxford life, with
its multiplied enjoyments, acting upon a boy just emancipated from
the restraints of a school, and, in one hour, elevated into what we
Oxonians so proudly and so exclusively denominate "a man,"[90] might
have tempted me into pursuits alien from the pure intellectual passions
which had so powerfully mastered my youthful heart some years before.
Extinguished such a passion could not be; nor could he think so, if
remembering the fervour with which I had expressed it, the sort of
"nympholepsy" which had seized upon me, and which, in some imperfect
way, I had avowed with reference to the very lakes and mountains
amongst which the scenery of this most original poetry had chiefly
grown up and moved. The very names of the ancient hills--Fairfield,
Seat Sandal, Helvellyn, Blencathara, Glaramara; the names of the
sequestered glens--such as Borrowdale, Martindale, Mardale, Wasdale,
and Ennerdale; but, above all, the shy pastoral recesses, not garishly
in the world's eye, like Windermere or Derwentwater, but lurking half
unknown to the traveller of that day--Grasmere, for instance, the
lovely abode of the poet himself, solitary, and yet sowed, as it were,
with a thin diffusion of humble dwellings--here a scattering, and there
a clustering, as in the starry heavens--sufficient to afford, at every
turn and angle, human remembrances and memorials of time-honoured
affections, or of passions (as the "Churchyard amongst the Mountains"
will amply demonstrate) not wanting even in scenic and tragical
interest: these were so many local spells upon me, equally poetic and
elevating with the Miltonic names of Valdarno and Vallombrosa.

Meantime, my delay was due to anything rather than to waning interest.
On the contrary, the real cause of my delay was the too great
profundity, and the increasing profundity, of my interest in this
regeneration of our national poetry, and the increasing awe, in due
proportion to the decaying thoughtlessness of boyhood, which possessed
me for the character of its author. So far from neglecting Wordsworth,
it is a fact that twice I had undertaken a long journey expressly for
the purpose of paying my respects to Wordsworth; twice I came so far
as the little rustic inn (then the sole inn of the neighbourhood) at
Church Coniston; and on neither occasion could I summon confidence
enough to present myself before him. It was not that I had any want
of proper boldness for facing the most numerous company of a mixed or
ordinary character: reserved, indeed, I was, perhaps even shy--from
the character of my mind, so profoundly meditative, and the character
of my life, so profoundly sequestered--but still, from counteracting
causes, I was not deficient in a reasonable self-confidence towards
the world generally. But the very image of Wordsworth, as I prefigured
it to my own planet-struck eye, crushed my faculties as before Elijah
or St. Paul. Twice, as I have said, did I advance as far as the Lake
of Coniston; which is about eight miles from the church of Grasmere,
and once I absolutely went forwards from Coniston to the very gorge
of Hammerscar, from which the whole Vale of Grasmere suddenly breaks
upon the view in a style of almost theatrical surprise, with its lovely
valley stretching before the eye in the distance, the lake lying
immediately below, with its solemn ark-like island of four and a half
acres in size seemingly floating on its surface, and its exquisite
outline on the opposite shore, revealing all its little bays[92] and
wild sylvan margin, feathered to the edge with wild flowers and ferns.
In one quarter, a little wood, stretching for about half a mile towards
the outlet of the lake; more directly in opposition to the spectator, a
few green fields; and beyond them, just two bowshots from the water, a
little white cottage gleaming from the midst of trees, with a vast and
seemingly never-ending series of ascents rising above it to the height
of more than three thousand feet. That little cottage was Wordsworth's
from the time of his marriage, and earlier; in fact, from the beginning
of the century to the year 1808. Afterwards, for many a year, it was
mine. Catching one hasty glimpse of this loveliest of landscapes,
I retreated like a guilty thing, for fear I might be surprised by
Wordsworth, and then returned faintheartedly to Coniston, and so to
Oxford, _re infectâ_.

This was in 1806. And thus far, from mere excess of nervous distrust
in my own powers for sustaining a conversation with Wordsworth, I
had for nearly five years shrunk from a meeting for which, beyond
all things under heaven, I longed. In early youth I laboured under a
peculiar embarrassment and penury of words, when I sought to convey my
thoughts adequately upon interesting subjects: neither was it words
only that I wanted; but I could not unravel, I could not even make
perfectly conscious to myself, the subsidiary thoughts into which one
leading thought often radiates; or, at least, I could not do this with
anything like the rapidity requisite for conversation. I laboured
like a sibyl instinct with the burden of prophetic woe, as often as
I found myself dealing with any topic in which the understanding
combined with deep feelings to suggest mixed and tangled thoughts:
and thus partly--partly also from my invincible habit of reverie--at
that era of my life, I had a most distinguished talent "_pour le
silence_." Wordsworth, from something of the same causes, suffered
(by his own report to myself) at the same age from pretty much the
same infirmity. And yet, in more advanced years--probably about
twenty-eight or thirty--both of us acquired a remarkable fluency in the
art of unfolding our thoughts colloquially. However, at that period my
deficiencies were what I have described. And, after all, though I had
no absolute cause for anticipating contempt, I was so far right in my
fears, that since that time I have had occasion to perceive a worldly
tone of sentiment in Wordsworth, not less than in Mrs. Hannah More and
other literary people, by which they were led to set a higher value
upon a limited respect from a person high in the world's esteem than
upon the most lavish spirit of devotion from an obscure quarter. Now,
in that point, _my_ feelings are far otherwise.

Meantime, the world went on; events kept moving; and, amongst them,
in the course of 1807, occurred the event of Coleridge's return to
England from his official station in the Governor's family at Malta.
At Bridgewater, as I have already recorded, in the summer of 1807, I
was introduced to him. Several weeks after he came with his family to
the Bristol Hot-Wells, at which, by accident, I was then visiting.
On calling upon him, I found that he had been engaged by the Royal
Institution to lecture at their theatre in Albemarle Street during
the coming winter of 1807-8, and, consequently, was embarrassed about
the mode of conveying his family to Keswick. Upon this, I offered my
services to escort them in a post-chaise. This offer was cheerfully
accepted; and at the latter end of October we set forwards--Mrs.
Coleridge, viz., with her two sons--Hartley, aged nine, Derwent, about
seven--her beautiful little daughter,[93] about five, and, finally,
myself. Going by the direct route through Gloucester, Bridgenorth, &c.,
on the third day we reached Liverpool, where I took up my quarters at
a hotel, whilst Mrs. Coleridge paid a visit of a few days to a very
interesting family, who had become friends of Southey during his visit
to Portugal. These were the Misses Koster, daughters of an English
gold-merchant of celebrity, who had recently quitted Lisbon on the
approach of the French army under Junot. Mr. Koster did me the honour
to call at my quarters, and invite me to his house; an invitation
which I very readily accepted, and had thus an opportunity of becoming
acquainted with a family the most accomplished I had ever known. At
dinner there appeared only the family party--several daughters, and
one son, a fine young man of twenty, but who was _consciously_ dying
of asthma. Mr. Koster, the head of the family, was distinguished for
his good sense and practical information; but, in Liverpool, even more
so by his eccentric and obstinate denial of certain notorious events;
in particular, some two years later, he denied that any such battle as
Talavera had ever been fought, and had a large wager depending upon the
decision. His house was the resort of distinguished foreigners; and, on
the first evening of my dining there, as well as afterwards, I there
met that marvel of women, Madame Catalani. I had heard her repeatedly;
but never before been near enough to see her smile and converse--even
to be honoured with a smile myself. She and Lady Hamilton were the most
effectively brilliant women I ever saw. However, on this occasion, the
Misses Koster outshone even La Catalani; to her they talked in the most
fluent Italian; to some foreign men, in Portuguese; to one in French;
and to most of the party in English; and each, by turns, seemed to be
their native tongue. Nor did they shrink, even in the presence of the
mighty enchantress, from exhibiting their musical skill.

Leaving Liverpool, after about a week's delay, we pursued our journey
northwards. We had slept on the first day at Lancaster. Consequently,
at the rate of motion which then prevailed throughout England--which,
however, was rarely equalled on that western road, where all things
were in arrear by comparison with the eastern and southern roads of the
kingdom--we found ourselves, about three o'clock in the afternoon, at
Ambleside, fourteen miles to the north-west of Kendal, and thirty-six
from Lancaster. There, for the last time, we stopped to change horses;
and about four o'clock we found ourselves on the summit of the White
Moss, a hill which rises between the second and third milestones on
the stage from Ambleside to Keswick, and which then retarded the
traveller's advance by a full fifteen minutes, but is now evaded by a
lower line of road. In ascending this hill, from weariness of moving
so slowly, I, with the two Coleridges, had alighted; and, as we all
chose to refresh ourselves by running down the hill into Grasmere,
we had left the chaise behind us, and had even lost the sound of the
wheels at times, when all at once we came, at an abrupt turn of the
road, in sight of a white cottage, with two yew-trees breaking the
glare of its white walls. A sudden shock seized me on recognising this
cottage, of which, in the previous year, I had gained a momentary
glimpse from Hammerscar, on the opposite side of the lake. I paused,
and felt my old panic returning upon me; but just then, as if to take
away all doubt upon the subject, I saw Hartley Coleridge, who had
gained upon me considerably, suddenly turn in at a garden gate; this
motion to the right at once confirmed me in my belief that here at
last we had reached our port; that this little cottage was tenanted
by that man whom, of all the men from the beginning of time, I most
fervently desired to see; that in less than a minute I should meet
Wordsworth face to face. Coleridge was of opinion that, if a man were
really and _consciously_ to see an apparition, in such circumstances
death would be the inevitable result; and, if so, the wish which we
hear so commonly expressed for such experience is as thoughtless as
that of Semele in the Grecian Mythology, so natural in a female, that
her lover should visit her _en grand costume_--presumptuous ambition,
that unexpectedly wrought its own ruinous chastisement! Judged by
Coleridge's test, my situation could not have been so terrific as _his_
who anticipates a ghost; for, certainly, I survived this meeting; but
at that instant it seemed pretty much the same to my own feelings.

Never before or since can I reproach myself with having trembled at the
approaching presence of any creature that is born of woman, excepting
only, for once or twice in my life, woman herself. Now, however, I
_did_ tremble; and I forgot, what in no other circumstances I could
have forgotten, to stop for the coming up of the chaise, that I might
be ready to hand Mrs. Coleridge out. Had Charlemagne and all his
peerage been behind me, or Cæsar and his equipage, or Death on his
pale horse, I should have forgotten them at that moment of intense
expectation, and of eyes fascinated to what lay before me, or what
might in a moment appear. Through the little gate I pressed forward;
ten steps beyond it lay the principal door of the house. To this, no
longer clearly conscious of my own feelings, I passed on rapidly; I
heard a step, a voice, and, like a flash of lightning, I saw the figure
emerge of a tallish man, who held out his hand, and saluted me with
most cordial expressions of welcome. The chaise, however, drawing up
to the gate at that moment, he (and there needed no Roman nomenclator
to tell me that this _he_ was Wordsworth) felt himself summoned to
advance and receive Mrs. Coleridge. I, therefore, stunned almost
with the actual accomplishment of a catastrophe so long anticipated
and so long postponed, mechanically went forward into the house. A
little semi-vestibule between two doors prefaced the entrance into
what might be considered the principal room of the cottage. It was
an oblong square, not above eight and a half feet high, sixteen feet
long, and twelve broad; very prettily wainscoted from the floor to the
ceiling with dark polished oak, slightly embellished with carving.
One window there was--a perfect and unpretending cottage window, with
little diamond panes, embowered at almost every season of the year with
roses, and in the summer and autumn with a profusion of jasmine and
other fragrant shrubs. From the exuberant luxuriance of the vegetation
around it, and from the dark hue of the wainscoting, this window,
though tolerably large, did not furnish a very powerful light to one
who entered from the open air. However, I saw sufficiently to be aware
of two ladies just entering the room, through a doorway opening upon a
little staircase, The foremost, a tallish young woman, with the most
winning expression of benignity upon her features, advanced to me,
presenting her hand with so frank an air that all embarrassment must
have fled in a moment before the native goodness of her manner. This
was Mrs. Wordsworth, cousin of the poet, and, for the last five years
or more, his wife.[94] She was now mother of two children, a son and
a daughter; and she furnished a remarkable proof how possible it is
for a woman neither handsome nor even comely according to the rigour
of criticism--nay, generally pronounced very plain--to exercise all
the practical fascination of beauty, through the mere compensatory
charms of sweetness all but angelic, of simplicity the most entire,
womanly self-respect and purity of heart speaking through all her
looks, acts, and movements. _Words_, I was going to have added; but her
words were few. In reality, she talked so little that Mr. Slave-Trade
Clarkson used to allege against her that she could only say "_God bless
you!_" Certainly, her intellect was not of an active order; but, in
a quiescent, reposing, meditative way, she appeared always to have a
genial enjoyment from her own thoughts; and it would have been strange,
indeed, if she, who enjoyed such eminent advantages of training, from
the daily society of her husband and his sister, failed to acquire
some power of judging for herself, and putting forth some functions
of activity. But undoubtedly that was not her element: to feel and
to enjoy in a luxurious repose of mind--there was her _forte_ and
her peculiar privilege; and how much better this was adapted to her
husband's taste, how much more adapted to uphold the comfort of his
daily life, than a blue-stocking loquacity, or even a legitimate talent
for discussion, may be inferred from his verses, beginning--

     "She was a phantom of delight,
     When first she gleam'd upon my sight."

Once for all,[95] these exquisite lines were dedicated to Mrs.
Wordsworth; were understood to describe her--to have been prompted by
the feminine graces of her character; hers they are, and will remain
for ever. To these, therefore, I may refer the reader for an idea of
what was most important in the partner and second self of the poet.
And I will add to this abstract of her _moral_ portrait these few
concluding traits of her appearance in a physical sense. Her figure was
tolerably good. In complexion she was fair, and there was something
peculiarly pleasing even in this accident of the skin, for it was
accompanied by an animated expression of health, a blessing which, in
fact, she possessed uninterruptedly. Her eyes, the reader may already
know, were

     "Like stars of twilight fair;
     Like twilight, too, her dark brown hair;
     But all things else about her drawn
     From May-time and the cheerful dawn."

Yet strange it is to tell that, in these eyes of vesper gentleness,
there was a considerable obliquity of vision; and much beyond
that slight obliquity which is often supposed to be an attractive
foible in the countenance: this _ought_ to have been displeasing or
repulsive; yet, in fact, it was not. Indeed all faults, had they
been ten times more and greater, would have been neutralized by
that supreme expression of her features to the unity of which every
lineament in the fixed parts, and every undulation in the moving parts,
of her countenance, concurred, viz. a sunny benignity--a radiant
graciousness--such as in this world I never saw surpassed.

Immediately behind her moved a lady, shorter, slighter, and perhaps, in
all other respects, as different from her in personal characteristics
as could have been wished for the most effective contrast. "Her
face was of Egyptian brown"; rarely, in a woman of English birth,
had I seen a more determinate gipsy tan. Her eyes were not soft,
as Mrs. Wordsworth's, nor were they fierce or bold; but they were
wild and startling, and hurried in their motion. Her manner was warm
and even ardent; her sensibility seemed constitutionally deep; and
some subtle fire of impassioned intellect apparently burned within
her, which, being alternately pushed forward into a conspicuous
expression by the irrepressible instincts of her temperament, and
then immediately checked, in obedience to the decorum of her sex and
age, and her maidenly condition, gave to her whole demeanour, and to
her conversation, an air of embarrassment, and even of self-conflict,
that was almost distressing to witness. Even her very utterance and
enunciation often suffered, in point of clearness and steadiness, from
the agitation of her excessive organic sensibility. At times, the
self-counteraction and self-baffling of her feelings caused her even
to stammer, and so determinately to stammer that a stranger who should
have seen her and quitted her in that state of feeling would have
certainly set her down for one plagued with that infirmity of speech
as distressingly as Charles Lamb himself. This was Miss Wordsworth,
the only sister of the poet--his "Dorothy"; who naturally owed so
much to the lifelong intercourse with her great brother in his most
solitary and sequestered years; but, on the other hand, to whom he has
acknowledged obligations of the profoundest nature; and, in particular,
this mighty one, through which we also, the admirers and the
worshippers of this great poet, are become equally her debtors--that,
whereas the intellect of Wordsworth was, by its original tendency, too
stern, too austere, too much enamoured of an ascetic harsh sublimity,
she it was--the lady who paced by his side continually through sylvan
and mountain tracks, in Highland glens, and in the dim recesses of
German charcoal-burners--that first _couched_ his eye to the sense of
beauty, humanized him by the gentler charities, and engrafted, with
her delicate female touch, those graces upon the ruder growths of
his nature which have since clothed the forest of his genius with a
foliage corresponding in loveliness and beauty to the strength of its
boughs and the massiness of its trunks. The greatest deductions from
Miss Wordsworth's attractions, and from the exceeding interest which
surrounded her in right of her character, of her history, and of the
relation which she fulfilled towards her brother, were the glancing
quickness of her motions, and other circumstances in her deportment
(such as her stooping attitude when walking), which gave an ungraceful,
and even an unsexual character to her appearance when out-of-doors.
She did not cultivate the graces which preside over the person and its
carriage. But, on the other hand, she was a person of very remarkable
endowments intellectually; and, in addition to the other great services
which she rendered to her brother, this I may mention, as greater than
all the rest, and it was one which equally operated to the benefit of
every casual companion in a walk--viz. the exceeding sympathy, always
ready and always profound, by which she made all that one could tell
her, all that one could describe, all that one could quote from a
foreign author, reverberate, as it were, _à plusieurs reprises_, to
one's own feelings, by the manifest impression it made upon _hers_. The
pulses of light are not more quick or more inevitable in their flow
and undulation, than were the answering and echoing movements of her
sympathizing attention. Her knowledge of literature was irregular, and
thoroughly unsystematic. She was content to be ignorant of many things;
but what she knew and had really mastered lay where it could not be
disturbed--in the temple of her own most fervid heart.

Such were the two ladies who, with himself and two children, and
at that time one servant, composed the poet's household. They were
both, I believe, about twenty-eight years old; and, if the reader
inquires about the single point which I have left untouched in their
portraiture--viz. the style of their manners--I may say that it was, in
_some_ points, naturally of a plain household simplicity, but every way
pleasing, unaffected, and (as respects Mrs. Wordsworth) even dignified.
Few persons had seen so little as this lady of the world. She had seen
nothing of high life, for she had seen little of any. Consequently, she
was unacquainted with the conventional modes of behaviour, prescribed
in particular situations by high breeding. But, as these modes are
little more than the product of dispassionate good sense, applied to
the circumstances of the case, it is surprising how few deficiencies
are perceptible, even to the most vigilant eye--or, at least, essential
deficiencies--in the general demeanour of any unaffected young woman,
acting habitually under a sense of sexual dignity and natural courtesy.
Miss Wordsworth had seen more of life, and even of good company; for
she had lived, when quite a girl, under the protection of Dr. Cookson,
a near relative, canon of Windsor, and a personal favourite of the
Royal Family, especially of George III. Consequently, she ought to
have been the more polished of the two; and yet, from greater natural
aptitudes for refinement of manner in her sister-in-law, and partly,
perhaps, from her more quiet and subdued manner, Mrs. Wordsworth would
have been pronounced very much the more lady-like person.

From the interest which attaches to anybody so nearly connected as
these two ladies with a great poet, I have allowed myself a larger
latitude than else might have been justifiable in describing them. I
now go on with my narrative:--

I was ushered up a little flight of stairs, fourteen in all, to a
little drawing-room, or whatever the reader chooses to call it.
Wordsworth himself has described the fireplace of this room as his

     "Half-kitchen and half-parlour fire."

It was not fully seven feet six inches high, and, in other respects,
pretty nearly of the same dimensions as the rustic hall below. There
was, however, in a small recess, a library of perhaps three hundred
volumes, which seemed to consecrate the room as the poet's study and
composing room; and such occasionally it was. But far oftener he both
studied, as I found, and composed, on the high road. I had not been two
minutes at the fireside, when in came Wordsworth, returning from his
friendly attentions to the travellers below, who, it seemed, had been
over-persuaded by hospitable solicitations to stay for this night in
Grasmere, and to make out the remaining thirteen miles of their road to
Keswick on the following day. Wordsworth entered. And "_what-like_"--to
use a Westmoreland as well as a Scottish expression--"_what-like_"
was Wordsworth? A reviewer in "Tait's Magazine," noticing some recent
collection of literary portraits, gives it as his opinion that Charles
Lamb's head was the finest among them.[96] This remark may have been
justified by the engraved portraits; but, certainly, the critic would
have cancelled it, had he seen the original heads--at least, had he
seen them in youth or in maturity; for Charles Lamb bore age with less
disadvantage to the intellectual expression of his appearance than
Wordsworth, in whom a sanguine complexion had, of late years, usurped
upon the original bronze-tint; and this change of hue, and change in
the quality of skin, had been made fourfold more conspicuous, and more
unfavourable in its general effect, by the harsh contrast of grizzled
hair which had displaced the original brown. No change in personal
appearance ever can have been so unfortunate; for, generally speaking,
whatever other disadvantages old age may bring along with it, one
effect, at least in male subjects, has a compensating tendency--that it
removes any tone of vigour too harsh, and mitigates the expression of
power too unsubdued. But, in Wordsworth, the effect of the change has
been to substitute an air of animal vigour, or, at least, hardiness,
as if derived from constant exposure to the wind and weather, for
the fine sombre complexion which he once wore, resembling that of a
Venetian senator or a Spanish monk.

Here, however, in describing the personal appearance of Wordsworth,
I go back, of course, to the point of time at which I am speaking.
He was, upon the whole, not a well-made man. His legs were pointedly
condemned by all female connoisseurs in legs; not that they were
bad in any way which _would_ force itself upon your notice--there
was no absolute deformity about them; and undoubtedly they had been
serviceable legs beyond the average standard of human requisition; for
I calculate, upon good data, that with these identical legs Wordsworth
must have traversed a distance of 175,000 to 180,000 English miles--a
mode of exertion which, to him, stood in the stead of alcohol and
all other stimulants whatsoever to the animal spirits; to which,
indeed, he was indebted for a life of unclouded happiness, and we
for much of what is most excellent in his writings. But, useful as
they have proved themselves, the Wordsworthian legs were certainly
not ornamental; and it was really a pity, as I agreed with a lady in
thinking, that he had not another pair for evening dress parties--when
no boots lend their friendly aid to mask our imperfections from the
eyes of female rigorists--those _elegantes formarum spectatrices_. A
sculptor would certainly have disapproved of their contour. But the
worst part of Wordsworth's person was the bust; there was a narrowness
and a droop about the shoulders which became striking, and had an
effect of meanness, when brought into close juxtaposition with a
figure of a more statuesque build. Once on a summer evening, walking
in the Vale of Langdale with Wordsworth, his sister, and Mr. J---, a
native Westmoreland clergyman, I remember that Miss Wordsworth was
positively mortified by the peculiar illustration which settled upon
this defective conformation. Mr. J---, a fine towering figure, six feet
high, massy and columnar in his proportions, happened to be walking, a
little in advance, with Wordsworth; Miss Wordsworth and myself being in
the rear; and from the nature of the conversation which then prevailed
in our front rank, something or other about money, devises, buying and
selling, we of the rear-guard thought it requisite to preserve this
arrangement for a space of three miles or more; during which time, at
intervals, Miss Wordsworth would exclaim, in a tone of vexation, "Is it
possible,--can that be William? How very mean he looks!" And she did
not conceal a mortification that seemed really painful, until I, for my
part, could not forbear laughing outright at the serious interest which
she carried into this trifle. She was, however, right, as regarded
the mere visual judgment. Wordsworth's figure, with all its defects,
was brought into powerful relief by one which had been cast in a more
square and massy mould; and in such a case it impressed a spectator
with a sense of absolute meanness, more especially when viewed from
behind and not counteracted by his countenance; and yet Wordsworth
was of a good height (five feet ten), and not a slender man; on the
contrary, by the side of Southey, his limbs looked thick, almost in a
disproportionate degree. But the total effect of Wordsworth's person
was always worst in a state of motion. Meantime, his face--that was one
which would have made amends for greater defects of figure. Many such,
and finer, I have seen amongst the portraits of Titian, and, in a later
period, amongst those of Vandyke, from the great era of Charles I, as
also from the court of Elizabeth and of Charles II, but none which has
more impressed me in my own time.

Haydon, in his great picture of "Christ's Entry into Jerusalem," has
introduced Wordsworth in the character of a disciple attending his
Divine Master, and Voltaire in the character of a sneering Jewish
elder. This fact is well known; and, as the picture itself is tolerably
well known to the public eye, there are multitudes now living who will
have seen a very impressive likeness of Wordsworth--some consciously,
some not suspecting it. There will, however, always be many who have
_not_ seen any portrait at all of Wordsworth; and therefore I will
describe its general outline and effect. It was a face of the long
order, often falsely classed as oval: but a greater mistake is made by
many people in supposing the long face which prevailed so remarkably in
the Elizabethan and Carolinian periods to have become extinct in our
own. Miss Ferrier, in one of her novels ("Marriage," I think), makes a
Highland girl protest that "no Englishman _with his round face_" shall
ever wean her heart from her own country; but England is not the land
of round faces; and those have observed little, indeed, who think so:
France it is that grows the round face, and in so large a majority of
her provinces that it has become one of the national characteristics.
And the remarkable impression which an Englishman receives from the
eternal recurrence of the orbicular countenance proves of itself,
without any _conscious_ testimony, how the fact stands; in the blind
sense of a monotony, not felt elsewhere, lies involved an argument
that cannot be gainsaid. Besides, even upon an _a priori_ argument,
how is it possible that the long face so prevalent in England, by all
confession, in certain splendid eras of our history, should have had
time, in some five or six generations, to grow extinct? Again, the
character of face varies essentially in different provinces. Wales has
no connexion in this respect with Devonshire, nor Kent with Yorkshire,
nor either with Westmoreland. England, it is true, tends, beyond all
known examples, to a general amalgamation of differences, by means
of its unrivalled freedom of intercourse. Yet, even in England, law
and necessity have opposed as yet such and so many obstacles to the
free diffusion of labour that every generation occupies, by at least
five-sixths of its numbers, the ground of its ancestors.

The movable part of a population is chiefly the higher part; and it
is the lower classes that, in every nation, compose the _fundus_, in
which lies latent the national face, as well as the national character.
Each exists here in racy purity and integrity, not disturbed in the
one by alien intermarriages, nor in the other by novelties of opinion,
or other casual effects, derived from education and reading. Now, look
into this _fundus_, and you will find, in many districts, no such
prevalence of the round orbicular face as some people erroneously
suppose; and in Westmoreland, especially, the ancient long face of
the Elizabethan period, powerfully resembling in all its lineaments
the ancient Roman face, and often (though not so uniformly) the face
of northern Italy in modern times. The face of Sir Walter Scott, as
Irving, the pulpit orator, once remarked to me, was the indigenous
face of the Border: the mouth, which was bad, and the entire lower
part of the face, are seen repeated in thousands of working-men;
or, as Irving chose to illustrate his position, "in thousands of
Border horse-jockeys." In like manner, Wordsworth's face was, if not
absolutely the indigenous face of the Lake district, at any rate a
variety of that face, a modification of that original type. The head
was well filled out; and there, to begin with, was a great advantage
over the head of Charles Lamb, which was absolutely truncated in
the posterior region--sawn off, as it were, by no timid sawyer. The
forehead was not remarkably lofty--and, by the way, some artists, in
their ardour for realizing their phrenological preconceptions, not
suffering nature to surrender quietly and by slow degrees her real
alphabet of signs and hieroglyphic characters, but forcing her language
prematurely into conformity with their own crude speculations, have
given to Sir Walter Scott a pile of forehead which is unpleasing
and cataphysical, in fact, a caricature of anything that is ever
seen in nature, and would (if real) be esteemed a deformity; in one
instance--that which was introduced in some annual or other--the
forehead makes about two-thirds of the entire face. Wordsworth's
forehead is also liable to caricature misrepresentations in these days
of phrenology: but, whatever it may appear to be in any man's fanciful
portrait, the real living forehead, as I have been in the habit of
seeing it for more than five-and-twenty years, is not remarkable
for its height; but it is, perhaps, remarkable for its breadth and
expansive development. Neither are the eyes of Wordsworth "large,"
as is erroneously stated somewhere in "Peter's Letters"[97]; on
the contrary, they are (I think) rather small; but _that_ does not
interfere with their effect, which at times is fine, and suitable to
his intellectual character. At times, I say, for the depth and subtlety
of eyes, even their colouring (as to condensation or dilation), varies
exceedingly with the state of the stomach; and, if young ladies were
aware of the magical transformations which can be wrought in the depth
and sweetness of the eye by a few weeks' walking exercise, I fancy we
should see their habits in this point altered greatly for the better.
I have seen Wordsworth's eyes oftentimes affected powerfully in this
respect; his eyes are not, under any circumstances, bright, lustrous,
or piercing; but, after a long day's toil in walking, I have seen
them assume an appearance the most solemn and spiritual that it is
possible for the human eye to wear. The light which resides in them
is at no time a superficial light; but, under favourable accidents,
it is a light which seems to come from unfathomed depths: in fact, it
is more truly entitled to be held "the light that never was on land
or sea," a light radiating from some far spiritual world, than any
the most idealizing that ever yet a painter's hand created. The nose,
a little arched, is large; which, by the way (according to a natural
phrenology, existing centuries ago amongst some of the lowest amongst
the human species), has always been accounted an unequivocal expression
of animal appetites organically strong. And that expressed the simple
truth: Wordsworth's intellectual passions were fervent and strong: but
they rested upon a basis of preternatural animal sensibility diffused
through _all_ the animal passions (or appetites); and something
of that will be found to hold of all poets who have been great by
original force and power, not (as Virgil) by means of fine management
and exquisite artifice of composition applied to their conceptions.
The mouth, and the whole circumjacencies of the mouth, composed the
strongest feature in Wordsworth's face; there was nothing specially
to be noticed that I know of in the mere outline of the lips; but the
swell and protrusion of the parts above and around the mouth are both
noticeable in themselves, and also because they remind me of a very
interesting fact which I discovered about three years after this my
first visit to Wordsworth.

Being a great collector of everything relating to Milton, I had
naturally possessed myself, whilst yet very young, of Richardson the
painter's thick octavo volume of notes on the "Paradise Lost."[98] It
happened, however, that my copy, in consequence of that mania for
portrait collecting which has stripped so many English classics of
their engraved portraits, wanted the portrait of Milton. Subsequently
I ascertained that it ought to have had a very good likeness of the
great poet; and I never rested until I procured a copy of the book
which had not suffered in this respect by the fatal admiration of the
amateur. The particular copy offered to me was one which had been
priced unusually high, on account of the unusually fine specimen which
it contained of the engraved portrait. This, for a particular reason,
I was exceedingly anxious to see; and the reason was--that, according
to an anecdote reported by Richardson himself, this portrait, of all
that were shown to her, was the only one acknowledged by Milton's last
surviving daughter to be a strong likeness of her father. And her
involuntary gestures concurred with her deliberate words:--for, on
seeing all the rest, she was silent and inanimate; but the very instant
she beheld that crayon drawing from which is derived the engraved
head in Richardson's book, she burst out into a rapture of passionate
recognition; exclaiming--"That is my father! that is my dear father!"
Naturally, therefore, after such a testimony, so much stronger than any
other person in the world could offer to the authentic value of this
portrait, I was eager to see it.

Judge of my astonishment when, in this portrait of Milton, I saw a
likeness nearly perfect of Wordsworth, better by much than any which I
have since seen of those expressly painted for himself. The likeness
is tolerably preserved in that by Carruthers, in which one of the
little Rydal waterfalls, &c., composes a background; yet this is much
inferior, as a mere portrait of Wordsworth, to the Richardson head of
Milton; and this, I believe, is the last which represents Wordsworth
in the vigour of his power. The rest, which I have not seen, may be
better as works of art (for anything I know to the contrary), but they
must labour under the great disadvantage of presenting the features
when "defeatured," in the degree and the way I have described, by
the peculiar ravages of old age, as it affects this family; for it
is noticed of the Wordsworths, by those who are familiar with their
peculiarities, that in their very blood and constitutional differences
lie hidden causes that are able, in some mysterious way,

         "Those shocks of passion to prepare
     That kill the bloom before its time,
     And blanch, without the owner's crime,
         The most resplendent hair."

Some people, it is notorious, live faster by much than others, the
oil is burned out sooner in one constitution than another: and the
cause of this may be various; but in the Wordsworths one part of the
cause is, no doubt, the secret fire of a temperament too fervid; the
self-consuming energies of the brain, that gnaw at the heart and
life-strings for ever. In that account which "The Excursion" presents
to us of an imaginary Scotsman who, to still the tumult of his heart,
when visiting the cataracts of a mountainous region, obliges himself
to study the laws of light and colour as they affect the rainbow of
the stormy waters, vainly attempting to mitigate the fever which
consumed him by entangling his mind in profound speculations; raising
a cross-fire of artillery from the subtilizing intellect, under the
vain conceit that in this way he could silence the mighty battery of
his impassioned heart: there we read a picture of Wordsworth and his
own youth. In Miss Wordsworth every thoughtful observer might read the
same self-consuming style of thought. And the effect upon each was so
powerful for the promotion of a premature old age, and of a premature
expression of old age, that strangers invariably supposed them fifteen
to twenty years older than they were. And I remember Wordsworth once
laughingly reporting to me, on returning from a short journey in 1809,
a little personal anecdote, which sufficiently showed what was the
spontaneous impression upon that subject of casual strangers, whose
feelings were not confused by previous knowledge of the truth. He
was travelling by a stage-coach, and seated outside, amongst a good
half-dozen of fellow-passengers. One of these, an elderly man, who
confessed to having passed the grand climacterical year (9 multiplied
into 7) of 63, though he did not say precisely by how many years, said
to Wordsworth, upon some anticipations which they had been mutually
discussing of changes likely to result from enclosures, &c., then going
on or projecting--"Ay, ay, another dozen of years will show us strange
sights; but you and I can hardly expect to see them."--"How so?" said
Wordsworth. "How so, my friend? How old do you take me to be?"--"Oh, I
beg pardon," said the other; "I meant no offence--but what?" looking
at Wordsworth more attentively--"you'll never see threescore, I'm of
opinion"; meaning to say that Wordsworth _had_ seen it already. And, to
show that he was not singular in so thinking, he appealed to all the
other passengers; and the motion passed (_nem. con._) that Wordsworth
was rather over than under sixty. Upon this he told them the literal
truth--that he had not yet accomplished his thirty-ninth year. "God
bless me!" said the climacterical man; "so then, after all, you'll have
a chance to see your childer get up like, and get settled! Only to
think of that!" And so closed the conversation, leaving to Wordsworth
an undeniable record of his own prematurely expressed old age in this
unaffected astonishment, amongst a whole party of plain men, that he
could really belong to a generation of the forward-looking, who live
by hope; and might reasonably expect to see a child of seven years
old matured into a man. And yet, as Wordsworth lived into his 82d
year,[100] it is plain that the premature expression of decay does not
argue any real decay.

Returning to the question of portraits, I would observe that this
Richardson engraving of Milton has the advantage of presenting, not
only by far the best likeness of Wordsworth, but of Wordsworth in the
prime of his powers--a point essential in the case of one so liable to
premature decay. It may be supposed that I took an early opportunity
of carrying the book down to Grasmere, and calling for the opinions
of Wordsworth's family upon this most remarkable coincidence. Not one
member of that family but was as much impressed as myself with the
accuracy of the likeness. All the peculiarities even were retained--a
drooping appearance of the eyelids, that remarkable swell which I
have noticed about the mouth, the way in which the hair lay upon the
forehead. In two points only there was a deviation from the rigorous
truth of Wordsworth's features--the face was a little too short and
too broad, and the eyes were too large. There was also a wreath of
laurel about the head, which (as Wordsworth remarked) disturbed the
natural expression of the whole picture[101]; else, and with these few
allowances, he also admitted that the resemblance was, _for that period
of his life_, perfect, or as nearly so as art could accomplish.

I have gone into so large and circumstantial a review of my
recollections on this point as would have been trifling and tedious
in excess, had these recollections related to a less important man;
but I have a certain knowledge that the least of them will possess a
lasting and a growing interest in connexion with William Wordsworth.
How peculiar, how different from the interest which we grant to the
ideas of a great philosopher, a great mathematician, or a great
reformer, is that burning interest which settles on the great poets
who have made themselves necessary to the human heart; who have first
brought into consciousness, and have clothed in words, those grand
catholic feelings that belong to the grand catholic situations of life
through all its stages; who have clothed them in such words that human
wit despairs of bettering them! Mighty were the powers, solemn and
serene is the memory, of Archimedes; and Apollonius shines like "the
starry Galileo" in the firmament of human genius; yet how frosty is
the feeling associated with these names by comparison with that which,
upon every sunny lawn, by the side of every ancient forest, even in the
farthest depths of Canada, many a young innocent girl, perhaps at this
very moment--looking now with fear to the dark recesses of the infinite
forest, and now with love to the pages of the infinite poet, until the
fear is absorbed and forgotten in the love--cherishes in her heart for
the name and person of Shakspere!

The English language is travelling fast towards the fulfilment of
its destiny. Through the influence of the dreadful Republic[102]
that within the thirty last years has run through all the stages of
infancy into the first stage of maturity, and through the English
colonies--African, Canadian, Indian, Australian--the English language
(and, therefore, the English literature) is running forward towards its
ultimate mission of eating up, like Aaron's rod, all other languages.
Even the German and the Spanish will inevitably sink before it; perhaps
within 100 or 150 years. In the recesses of California, in the vast
solitudes of Australia, _The Churchyard amongst the Mountains_, from
Wordsworth's "Excursion," and many a scene of his shorter poems, will
be read, even as now Shakspere is read amongst the forests of Canada.
All which relates to the writer of these poems will then bear a value
of the same kind as that which attaches to our personal memorials
(unhappily so slender) of Shakspere.

Let me now attempt to trace, in a brief outline, the chief incidents
in the life of William Wordsworth, which are interesting, not only in
virtue of their illustrious subject, but also as exhibiting a most
remarkable (almost a providential) arrangement of circumstances, all
tending to one result--that of insulating from worldly cares, and
carrying onward from childhood to the grave, in a state of serene
happiness, one who was unfitted for daily toil, and, at all events,
who could not, under such demands upon his time and anxieties, have
prosecuted those genial labours in which all mankind have an interest.

William Wordsworth was born[103] at Cockermouth, a small town of
Cumberland, lying about a dozen miles to the north-west of Keswick,
on the high road from that town to Whitehaven. His father was a
solicitor, and acted as an agent for that Lord Lonsdale, the immediate
predecessor of the present,[104] who is not unfrequently described by
those who still remember him, as "the bad Lord Lonsdale." In what was
he bad? Chiefly, I believe, in this--that, being a man of great local
power, founded on his rank, on his official station of Lord-Lieutenant
over two counties, and on a very large estate, he used his power at
times in a most oppressive way. I have heard it said that he was mad;
and, at any rate, he was inordinately capricious--capricious even to
eccentricity. But, perhaps, his madness was nothing more than the
intemperance of a haughty and a headstrong will, encouraged by the
consciousness of power, and tempted to abuses of it by the abject
servility which poverty and dependence presented in one direction,
embittering the contrast of that defiance which inevitably faced him in
another, throughout a land of freedom and amongst spirits as haughty
as his own. He was a true feudal chieftain; and, in the very approaches
to his mansion, in the style of his equipage, or whatever else was
likely to meet the public eye, he delighted to express his disdain of
modern refinements, and the haughty carelessness of his magnificence.
The coach in which he used to visit Penrith, the nearest town to his
principal house of Lowther, was old and neglected; his horses fine, but
untrimmed; and such was the impression diffused about him by his gloomy
temper and his habits of oppression, that the streets were silent as
he traversed them, and an awe sat upon many faces (so, at least, I
have heard a Penrith contemporary of the old despot declare), pretty
much like that which may be supposed to attend the entry into a guilty
town of some royal commission for trying state criminals. In his park
you saw some of the most magnificent timber in the kingdom--trees that
were coeval with the feuds of York and Lancaster, yews that possibly
had furnished bows to Coeur de Lion, and oaks that might have built
a navy. All was savage grandeur about these native forests: their
sweeping lawns and glades had been unapproached, for centuries it might
be, by the hand of art; and amongst them roamed--not the timid fallow
deer--but thundering droves of wild horses.

Lord Lonsdale went to London less frequently than else he might have
done, because at home he was allowed to forget that in this world
there was any greater man than himself. Even in London, however, his
haughty injustice found occasions for making itself known. On a court
day (I revive an anecdote once familiarly known), St. James's Street
was lined by cavalry, and the orders were peremptory that no carriages
should be allowed to pass, except those which were carrying parties
to court. Whether it were by accident or by way of wilfully provoking
such a collision, Lord Lonsdale's carriage advanced; and the coachman,
in obedience to orders shouted out from the window, was turning down
the forbidden route, when a trooper rode up to the horses' heads,
and stopped them; the thundering menaces of Lord Lonsdale perplexed
the soldier, who did not know but he might be bringing himself into
a scrape by persisting in his opposition; but the officer on duty,
observing the scene, rode up, and, in a determined tone, enforced the
order, causing two of his men to turn the horses' heads round into
Piccadilly. Lord Lonsdale threw his card to the officer, and a duel
followed; in which, however, the outrageous injustice of his lordship
met with a pointed rebuke; for the first person whom he summoned to
his aid, in the quality of second, though a friend, and, I believe,
a relative of his own, declined to sanction by any interference so
scandalous a quarrel with an officer for simply executing an official
duty. In this dilemma (for probably he was aware that few military men
would fail to take the same disapproving view of the affair) he applied
to the present[105] Earl of Lonsdale, then Sir William Lowther. Either
there must have been some needless discourtesy in the officer's mode
of fulfilling his duty, or else Sir William thought the necessity of
the case, however wantonly provoked, a sufficient justification for
a relative giving his assistance, even under circumstances of such
egregious injustice. At any rate, it is due to Sir William, in mere
candour, to suppose that he did nothing in this instance but what his
conscience approved; seeing that in all others his conduct has been
such as to win him the universal respect of the two counties in which
he is best known. He it was that acted as second; and, by a will which
is said to have been dated the same day, he became eventually possessed
of a large property, which did not necessarily accompany the title.

Another anecdote is told of the same Lord Lonsdale which expresses,
in a more eccentric way, and a way that to many people will be
affecting--to some shocking--the moody energy of his passions.
He loved, with passionate fervour, a fine young woman, of humble
parentage, in a Cumberland farmhouse. Her he had persuaded to leave
her father, and put herself under his protection. Whilst yet young and
beautiful, she died: Lord Lonsdale's sorrow was profound; he could not
bear the thought of a final parting from that face which had become so
familiar to his heart: he caused her to be embalmed; a glass was placed
over her features; and at intervals, when his thoughts reverted to her
memory, he found a consolation (or perhaps a luxurious irritation) of
his sorrow in visiting this sad memorial of his former happiness.
This story, which I have often heard repeated by the country-people
of Cumberland, strengthened the general feeling of this eccentric
nobleman's self-willed character, though in this instance complicated
with a trait of character that argued nobler capacities. By what rules
he guided himself in dealing with the various lawyers, agents, or
stewards whom his extensive estates brought into a dependency upon
his justice or his moderation--whether, in fact, he had no rule, but
left all to accident or caprice--I have never learned. Generally, I
have heard it said that in some years of his life he resisted the
payment of all bills indiscriminately which he had any colourable plea
for supposing to contain overcharges; some fared ill, because they
were neighbours, and his lordship could say that "he knew them to be
knaves"; others fared worse, because they were so remote that "how
could his lordship know what they were?" Of this number, and possibly
for this reason left unpaid, was Wordsworth's father. He died whilst
his four sons and one daughter were yet helpless children, leaving
to them respectable fortunes, but which, as yet, were unrealized and
tolerably hypothetic, as they happened to depend upon so shadowy a
basis as the justice of Lord Lonsdale. The executors of the will,
and trustees of the children's interests, in one point acted wisely:
foreseeing the result of a legal contest with so potent a defendant
as this leviathan of two counties, and that, under any nominal award,
the whole estate of the orphans might be swallowed up in the costs
of any suit that should be carried into Chancery, they prudently
withdrew from all active measures of opposition, confiding the event
to Lord Lonsdale's returning sense of justice. Unfortunately for that
nobleman's reputation, and also, as was thought, for the children's
prosperity, before this somewhat rusty quality of justice could have
time to operate, his lordship died.

However, for once the world was wrong in its malicious anticipations:
the successor to Lord Lonsdale's titles and Cumberland estates was
made aware of the entire case, in all its circumstances; and he very
honourably gave directions for full restitution being made. This
was done; and in one respect the result was more fortunate for the
children than if they had been trained from youth to rely upon their
expectations: for, by the time this repayment was made, three out of
the five children were already settled in life, with the very amplest
prospects opening before them--_so_ ample as to make their private
patrimonial fortunes of inconsiderable importance in their eyes; and
very probably the withholding of their inheritance it was, however
unjust, and however little contemplated as an occasion of any such
effect, that urged these three persons to the exertions requisite
for their present success. Two only of the children remained to whom
the restoration of their patrimony was a matter of grave importance;
but it was precisely those two whom no circumstances could have made
independent of their hereditary means by personal exertions--viz.
William Wordsworth, the poet, and Dorothy, the sole daughter of the
house. The three others were:--Richard, the eldest: he had become a
thriving solicitor, at one of the inns of court in London; and, if
he died only moderately rich, and much below the expectations of his
acquaintance, in the final result of his laborious life, it was because
he was moderate in his desires, and, in his later years, reverting
to the pastoral region of his infancy and boyhood, chose rather to
sit down by a hearth of his own amongst the Cumberland mountains, and
wisely to woo the deities of domestic pleasures and health, than to
follow the chase after wealth in the feverish crowds of the capital.
The third son (I believe) was Christopher (Dr. Wordsworth), who, at an
early age, became a man of importance in the English Church, being made
one of the chaplains and librarians of the Archbishop of Canterbury
(Dr. Manners Sutton, father of the late Speaker, Lord Canterbury). He
has since risen to the important and dignified station--once held by
Barrow, and afterwards by Bentley--of Master of Trinity in Cambridge.
Trinity in Oxford is not a first-rate college; but Trinity, Cambridge,
answers in rank and authority to Christ Church in Oxford; and to be the
head of that college is rightly considered a very splendid distinction.

Dr. Wordsworth has distinguished himself as an author by a very useful
republication, entitled, "Ecclesiastical Biography," which he has
enriched with valuable notes. And in his own person, besides other
works more professional, he is the author of one very interesting
work of historical research upon the difficult question of "Who wrote
the 'Eicon Basilike'?" a question still unsettled, but much nearer
to a settlement, in consequence of the strong presumptions which Dr.
Wordsworth has adduced on behalf of the King's claim.[106]

The fourth and youngest son, John, was in the service of the East India
Company, and perished most unhappily, at the very outset of the voyage
which he had meant to be his last, off the coast of Dorsetshire, in the
Company's ship _Abergavenny_. A calumny was current in some quarters,
that Captain Wordsworth was in a state of intoxication at the time
of the calamity. But the printed report of the affair, revised by
survivors, entirely disproves this calumny; which, besides, was in
itself incredible to all who were acquainted with Captain Wordsworth's
most temperate and even philosophic habits of life. So peculiarly,
indeed, was Captain Wordsworth's temperament, and the whole system of
his life, coloured by a grave and meditative turn of thought, that
amongst his brother officers in the Company's service he bore the
surname of "The Philosopher." And William Wordsworth, the poet, not
only always spoke of him with a sort of respect that argued him to have
been no ordinary man, but he has frequently assured me of one fact
which, as implying some want of sincerity in himself, gave me pain
to hear--viz. that in the fine lines entitled "The Happy Warrior,"
reciting the main elements which enter into the composition of a hero,
he had in view chiefly his brother John's character. That was true, I
daresay, but it was inconsistent in some measure with the note attached
to the lines, by which the reader learns that it was out of reverence
for Lord Nelson, as one who transcended the estimate here made, that
the poem had not been openly connected with his name, as the real
suggester of the thoughts. Now, privately, though still professing a
lively admiration for the mighty Admiral, as one of the few men who
carried into his professional labours a real and vivid genius (and thus
far Wordsworth often testified a deep admiration for Lord Nelson), yet,
in reference to these particular lines, he uniformly declared that Lord
Nelson was much below the ideal there contemplated, and that, in fact,
it had been suggested by the recollection of his brother. But, if so,
why should it have been dissembled? And surely, in some of the finest
passages, this cannot be so; for example, when he makes it one trait of
the heaven-born hero that he, if called upon to face some mighty day of
trial--

                   "To which Heaven has joined
     Great issues, good or bad, for human kind--
     Is happy as a lover, and attired
     With sudden brightness, like a man inspired"--

then, at least, he must have had Lord Nelson's idea predominating in
his thoughts; for Captain Wordsworth was scarcely tried in such a
situation. There can be no doubt, however, that he merited the praises
of his brother; and it was indeed an idle tale that he should first of
all deviate from this philosophic temperance upon an occasion where
his utmost energies and the fullest self-possession were all likely
to prove little enough. In reality it was the pilot, the incompetent
pilot, who caused the fatal catastrophe;--"O pilot, you have ruined
me!" were amongst the last words that Captain Wordsworth was heard to
utter--pathetic words, and fit for him, "a meek man and a brave," to
use in addressing a last reproach to one who, not through misfortune
or overruling will of Providence, but through miserable conceit and
unprincipled levity, had brought total ruin upon so many gallant
countrymen. Captain Wordsworth might have saved his own life; but the
perfect loyalty of his nature to the claims upon him, that sublime
fidelity to duty which is so often found amongst men of his profession,
kept him to the last upon the wreck; and, after _that_, it is probable
that the almost total wreck of his own fortunes (which, but for this
overthrow, would have amounted to twenty thousand pounds, upon the
successful termination of this one voyage), but still more the total
ruin of the new and splendid Indiaman confided to his care, had so much
dejected his spirits that he was not in a condition for making such
efforts as, under a more hopeful prospect, he might have been able to
make. Six weeks his body lay unrecovered; at the end of that time,
it was found, and carried to the Isle of Wight, and buried in close
neighbourhood to the quiet fields which he had so recently described
in letters to his sister at Grasmere as a Paradise of English peace,
to which his mind would be likely oftentimes to revert amidst the
agitations of the sea.

Such were the modes of life pursued by three of the orphan children:
such the termination of life to the youngest. Meantime, the one
daughter of the house was reared liberally, in the family of a relative
at Windsor; and she might have pursued a quiet and decorous career, of
a character, perhaps, somewhat tame, under the same dignified auspices;
but, at an early age, her good angel threw open to her a vista of
nobler prospects, in the opportunity which then arose, and which she
did not hesitate to seize, of becoming the companion, through a life
of delightful wanderings--of what, to her more elevated friends, seemed
little short of vagrancy--the companion and confidential friend, and,
with a view to the enlargement of her own intellect, the pupil, of a
brother, the most original and most meditative man of his own age.

William had passed his infancy on the very margin of the Lake district,
just six miles, in fact, beyond the rocky screen of Whinlatter, and
within one hour's ride of Bassenthwaite Water. To those who live in the
tame scenery of Cockermouth, the blue mountains in the distance, the
sublime peaks of Borrowdale and of Buttermere, raise aloft a signal,
as it were, of a new country, a country of romance and mystery, to
which the thoughts are habitually turning. Children are fascinated and
haunted with vague temptations, when standing on the frontiers of such
a foreign land; and so was Wordsworth fascinated, so haunted. Fortunate
for Wordsworth that, at an early age, he was transferred to a quiet
nook of this lovely district. At the little town of Hawkshead, seated
on the north-west angle of Esthwaite Water, a grammar-school (which, in
English usage, means a school for classical literature) was founded, in
Queen Elizabeth's reign, by Archbishop Sandys, who belonged to the very
ancient family of that name still seated in the neighbourhood. Hither
were sent all the four brothers; and here it was that Wordsworth passed
his life, from the age of nine until the time arrived for his removal
to college. Taking into consideration the peculiar tastes of the
person, and the peculiar advantages of the place, I conceive that no
pupil of a public school can ever have passed a more luxurious boyhood
than Wordsworth. The school discipline was not by many evidences very
strict; the mode of living out of school very much resembled that of
Eton for Oppidans; less elegant, no doubt, and less costly in its
provisions for accommodation, but not less comfortable, and, in that
part of the arrangements which was chiefly Etonian, even more so; for
in both places the boys, instead of being gathered into one fold, and
at night into one or two huge dormitories, were distributed amongst
motherly old "dames," technically so called at Eton, but not at
Hawkshead. In the latter place, agreeably to the inferior scale of the
whole establishment, the houses were smaller, and more cottage-like,
consequently more like private households: and the old lady of the
_ménage_ was more constantly amongst them, providing, with maternal
tenderness and with a professional pride, for the comfort of her young
flock, and protecting the weak from oppression. The humble cares to
which these poor matrons dedicated themselves may be collected from
several allusions scattered through the poems of Wordsworth; that
entitled "Nutting," for instance, in which his own early Spinosistic
feeling is introduced, of a mysterious presence diffused through the
solitudes of woods, a presence that was disturbed by the intrusion of
careless and noisy outrage, and which is brought into a strong relief
by the previous homely picture of the old housewife equipping her young
charge with beggar's weeds, in order to prepare him for a struggle
with thorns and brambles. Indeed, not only the moderate rank of the
boys, and the peculiar kind of relation assumed by these matrons,
equally suggested this humble class of motherly attentions, but the
whole spirit of the place and neighbourhood was favourable to an old
English homeliness of domestic and personal economy. Hawkshead, most
fortunately for its own manners and the primitive style of its habits
even to this day, stands about six miles out of the fashionable line
for the "Lakers."

Esthwaite, though a lovely scene in its summer garniture of woods,
has no features of permanent grandeur to rely upon. A wet or gloomy
day, even in summer, reduces it to little more than a wildish pond,
surrounded by miniature hills: and the sole circumstances which restore
the sense of a romantic region and an Alpine character are the towering
groups of Langdale and Grasmere fells, which look over the little
pastoral barriers of Esthwaite, from distances of eight, ten, and
fourteen miles. Esthwaite, therefore, being no object for itself, and
the sublime head of Coniston being accessible by a road which evades
Hawkshead, few tourists ever trouble the repose of this little village
town. And in the days of which I am speaking (1778-1787) tourists were
as yet few and infrequent to _any_ parts of the country. Mrs. Radcliffe
had not begun to cultivate the sense of the picturesque in her popular
romances; guide-books, with the sole exception of "Gray's Posthumous
Letters," had not arisen to direct public attention to this domestic
Calabria; roads were rude, and, in many instances, not wide enough to
admit post-chaises; but, above all, the whole system of travelling
accommodations was barbarous and antediluvian for the requisitions of
the pampered south. As yet the land had rest; the annual fever did
not shake the very hills; and (which was the happiest immunity of
the whole) false taste, the pseudo-romantic rage, had not violated
the most awful solitudes amongst the ancient hills by opera-house
decorations. Wordsworth, therefore, enjoyed this labyrinth of valleys
in a perfection that no one can have experienced since the opening
of the present century. The whole was one paradise of virgin beauty;
the rare works of man, all over the land, were hoar with the grey
tints of an antique picturesque; nothing was new, nothing was raw and
uncicatrized. Hawkshead, in particular, though tamely seated in itself
and its immediate purlieus, has a most fortunate and central locality,
as regards the best (at least the most interesting) scenes for a
pedestrian rambler. The gorgeous scenery of Borrowdale, the austere
sublimities of Wastdalehead, of Langdalehead, or Mardale--these are too
oppressive, in their colossal proportions and their utter solitudes,
for encouraging a perfectly human interest. Now, taking Hawkshead
as a centre, with a radius of about eight miles, one might describe
a little circular tract which embosoms a perfect network of little
valleys--separate wards or cells, as it were, of one larger valley,
walled in by the great leading mountains of the region. Grasmere,
Easedale, Great and Little Langdale, Tilberthwaite, Yewdale, Elter
Water, Loughrigg Tarn, Skelwith, and many other little quiet nooks, lie
within a single division of this labyrinthine district. All these are
within one summer afternoon's ramble. And amongst these, for the years
of his boyhood, lay the daily excursions of Wordsworth.

I do not conceive that Wordsworth _could_ have been an amiable boy;
he was austere and unsocial, I have reason to think, in his habits;
not generous; and not self-denying. I am pretty certain that no
consideration would ever have induced Wordsworth to burden himself
with a lady's reticule, parasol, shawl, or anything exacting trouble
and attention. Mighty must be the danger which would induce him to
lead her horse by the bridle. Nor would he, without some demur, stop
to offer her his hand over a stile. Freedom--unlimited, careless,
insolent freedom--unoccupied possession of his own arms--absolute
control over his own legs and motions--these have always been so
essential to his comfort, that, in any case where they were likely to
become questionable, he would have declined to make one of the party.
Meantime, we are not to suppose that Wordsworth the boy expressly
sought for solitary scenes of nature amongst woods and mountains with
a direct conscious anticipation of imaginative pleasure, and loving
them with a pure, disinterested love, on their own separate account.
These are feelings beyond boyish nature, or, at all events, beyond
boyish nature trained amidst the selfishness of social intercourse.
Wordsworth, like his companions, haunted the hills and the vales
for the sake of angling, snaring birds, swimming, and sometimes of
hunting, according to the Westmoreland fashion (or the Irish fashion
in Galway), on foot; for riding to the chase is quite impossible,
from the precipitous nature of the ground. It was in the course of
these pursuits, by an indirect effect growing gradually upon him, that
Wordsworth became a passionate lover of nature, at the time when the
growth of his intellectual faculties made it possible that he should
combine those thoughtful passions with the experience of the eye and
the ear.

One of the most interesting among the winter amusements of the
Hawkshead boys was that of skating on the adjacent lake. Esthwaite
Water is not one of the deep lakes, as its neighbours of Windermere,
Coniston, and Grasmere are; consequently, a very slight duration
of frost is sufficient to freeze it into a bearing strength. In
this respect Wordsworth found the same advantages in his boyhood as
afterwards at the University; for the county of Cambridge is generally
liable to shallow waters; and that University breeds more good skaters
than all the rest of England. About the year 1810, by way of expressing
an interest in "The Friend," which was just at that time appearing in
weekly numbers, Wordsworth allowed Coleridge to print an extract from
the poem on his own life, descriptive of the games celebrated upon
the ice of Esthwaite by all who were able to skate: the mimic chases
of hare and hounds, pursued long after the last orange gleam of light
had died away from the western horizon--oftentimes far into the night;
a circumstance which does not speak much for the discipline of the
schools, or rather, perhaps, _does_ speak much for the advantages of a
situation so pure, and free from the usual perils of a town, as could
allow of a discipline so lax. Wordsworth, in this fine descriptive
passage--which I wish that I had at this moment the means of citing,
in order to amplify my account of his earliest tyrocinium--speaks of
himself as frequently wheeling aside from his joyous companions to
cut across the image of a star; and thus, already in the midst of
sportiveness, and by a movement of sportiveness, half unconsciously to
himself expressing the growing necessity of retirement to his habits
of thought.[107] At another period of the year, when the golden summer
allowed the students a long season of early play before the studies of
the day began, he describes himself as roaming, hand-in-hand, with
one companion, along the banks of Esthwaite Water, chanting, with one
voice, the verses of Goldsmith and of Gray--verses which, at the time
of recording the fact, he had come to look upon as either in parts
false in the principles of their composition, or, at any rate, as far
below the tone of high poetic passion; but which, at that time of life,
when the profounder feelings were as yet only germinating, filled them
with an enthusiasm

     "More bright than madness and the dreams of wine."

Meanwhile, how prospered the classical studies which formed the main
business of Wordsworth at Hawkshead? Not, in all probability, very
well; for, though Wordsworth finally became a very sufficient master
of the Latin language, and read certain favourite authors, especially
Horace, with a critical nicety, and with a feeling for the felicities
of his composition, I have reason to think that little of this skill
had been obtained at Hawkshead. As to Greek, that is a language which
Wordsworth never had energy enough to cultivate with effect.

From Hawkshead, and, I believe, after he had entered his eighteenth
year (a time which is tolerably early on the English plan), probably
at the latter end of the year 1787, Wordsworth entered at St.
John's College, Cambridge. St. John's ranks as the second college
in Cambridge--the second as to numbers, and influence, and general
consideration; in the estimation of the Johnians as the first, or
at least as co-equal in all things with Trinity; from which, at any
rate, the general reader will collect that no such absolute supremacy
is accorded to any society in Cambridge as in Oxford is accorded
necessarily to Christ Church. The advantages of a large college are
considerable, both to the idle man, who wishes to lurk unnoticed in the
crowd, and to the brilliant man, whose vanity could not be gratified
by pre-eminence amongst a few. Wordsworth, though not idle as regarded
his own pursuits, was so as regarded the pursuits of the place. With
respect to them he felt--to use his own words--that his hour was not
come; and that his doom for the present was a happy obscurity, which
left him, unvexed by the torments of competition, to the genial
enjoyment of life in its most genial hours.

It will excite some astonishment when I mention that, on coming to
Cambridge, Wordsworth actually assumed the beau, or, in modern slang,
the "dandy." He dressed in silk stockings, had his hair powdered, and
in all things plumed himself on his gentlemanly habits. To those who
remember the slovenly dress of his middle and philosophic life, this
will furnish matter for a smile.

Stranger still it is to tell that, for the first time in his life,
Wordsworth became inebriated at Cambridge. It is but fair to add that
the first time was also the last time. But perhaps the strangest
part of the story is the occasion of this drunkenness; which was in
celebration of his first visit to the very rooms at Christ College once
occupied by Milton--intoxication by way of homage to the most temperate
of men; and this homage offered by one who has turned out himself to
the full as temperate! Every man, meantime, who is not a churl, must
grant a privilege and charter of large enthusiasm to such an occasion.
And an older man than Wordsworth (at that era not fully nineteen), and
a man even without a poet's blood in his veins, might have leave to
forget his sobriety in such circumstances. Besides which, after all, I
have heard from Wordsworth's own lips that he was not too far gone to
attend chapel decorously during the very acmé of his elevation.[108]

The rooms which Wordsworth occupied at St. John's were singularly
circumstanced; mementoes of what is highest and what is lowest in
human things solicited the eye and the ear all day long. If the
occupant approached the outdoors prospect, in one direction, there was
visible, through the great windows in the adjacent chapel of Trinity,
the statue of Newton "with his silent face and prism," memorials of
the abstracting intellect, serene and absolute, emancipated from
fleshly bonds. On the other hand, immediately below, stood the college
kitchen; and, in that region, "from noon to dewy eve," resounded
the shrill voice of scolding from the female ministers of the head
cook, never suffering the mind to forget one of the meanest amongst
human necessities. Wordsworth, however, as one who passed much of his
time in social gaiety, was less in the way of this annoyance than a
profounder student would have been. Probably he studied little beyond
French and Italian during his Cambridge life; not, however, at any
time forgetting (as I had so much reason to complain, when speaking
of my Oxonian contemporaries) the literature of his own country. It
is true that he took the regular degree of A.B., and in the regular
course; but this was won in those days by a mere nominal examination,
unless where the mathematical attainments of the student prompted his
ambition to contest the splendid distinction of Senior Wrangler. This,
in common with all other honours of the University, is won in our days
with far severer effort than in that age of relaxed discipline; but
at no period could it have been won, let the malicious say what they
will, without an amount of mathematical skill very much beyond what has
ever been exacted of its _alumni_ by any other European University.
Wordsworth was a profound admirer of the sublimer mathematics; at least
of the higher geometry. The secret of this admiration for geometry
lay in the antagonism between this world of bodiless abstraction and
the world of passion. And here I may mention appropriately, and I hope
without any breach of confidence, that, in a great philosophic poem of
Wordsworth's, which is still in MS., and will remain in MS. until after
his death, there is, at the opening of one of the books, a dream, which
reaches the very _ne plus ultra_ of sublimity, in my opinion, expressly
framed to illustrate the eternity, and the independence of all social
modes or fashions of existence, conceded to these two hemispheres, as
it were, that compose the total world of human power--mathematics on
the one hand, poetry on the other.[109]

I scarcely know whether I am entitled to quote--as my memory (though
not refreshed by a sight of the poem for more than twenty years) would
well enable me to do--any long extract; but thus much I may allowably
say, as it cannot in any way affect Mr. Wordsworth's interests, that
the form of the dream is as follows; and, by the way, even this form
is not arbitrary; but, with exquisite skill in the art of composition,
is made to arise out of the situation in which the poet had previously
found himself, and is faintly prefigured in the elements of that
situation. He had been reading "Don Quixote" by the sea-side; and,
oppressed by the heat of the sun, he had fallen asleep, whilst gazing
on the barren sands before him. Even in these circumstances of the
case--as, first, the adventurous and half-lunatic knight riding about
the world, on missions of universal philanthropy, and, secondly, the
barren sands of the sea-shore--one may read the germinal principles of
the dream. He dreams that, walking in some sandy wilderness of Africa,
some endless Zahara, he sees at a distance

     "An Arab of the desert, lance in rest,
     Mounted upon a dromedary."

The Arab rides forward to meet him; and the dreamer perceives, in the
countenance of the rider, the agitation of fear, and that he often
looks behind him in a troubled way, whilst in his hand he holds two
books--one of which is "Euclid's Elements"; the other (which is a
book and yet not a book) seeming, in fact, a shell as well as a
book--seeming neither, and yet both at once. The Arab directs him to
apply the shell to his ear; upon which,

     "In an unknown tongue, which yet I understood,"

the dreamer says that he heard

     "A wild prophetic blast of harmony,
     An ode, as if in passion utter'd, that foretold
     Destruction to the people of this earth
     By deluge near at hand."

The Arab, with grave countenance, assures him that it is even so; that
all was true which had been said; and that he himself was riding upon a
divine mission, having it in charge

                         "To bury those two books;
     The one that held acquaintance with the stars,
     ... undisturb'd by Space or Time;
     The other, that was a god, yea, many gods,
     Had voices more than all the winds, and was
     A joy, a consolation, and a hope!"

That is, in effect, his mission is to secure the two great interests of
poetry and mathematics from sharing in the watery ruin. As he talks,
suddenly the dreamer perceives that the Arab's "countenance grew
more disturbed," and that his eye was often reverted; upon which the
dreaming poet also looks along the desert in the same direction; and in
the far horizon he descries "a glittering light." What is it? he asks
of the Arab rider. "It is," said the Arab, "the waters of the earth,"
that even then were travelling on their awful errand. Upon which, the
poet sees this apostle of the desert riding

         "Hurrying o'er the illimitable waste,
     With the fleet waters of a drowning world
     In chase of him: whereat I [meaning the poet] waked in terror,
     And saw the sea before me, and the book
     In which I had been reading at my side."

The sketch I have here given of this sublime dream sufficiently
attests the interest which Wordsworth took in the mathematic studies
of the place, and the exalted privilege which he ascribed to them of
co-eternity with "the vision and the faculty divine" of the poet--the
destiny common to both, of an endless triumph over the ruins of
nature and of time. Meantime, he himself travelled no farther in
these studies than through the six elementary books usually selected
from the fifteen of Euclid. Whatever might be the interests of his
speculative understanding, whatever his admiration, practically he
devoted himself to the more agitating interests of man, social and
political, just then commencing that vast career of revolution which
has never since been still or stationary; interests which in his mind
alternated, nevertheless, with another and different interest, in
the grander forms of external nature, as found amongst mountains and
forests. In obedience to this latter passion it was--for a passion it
had become--that during one of his long Cambridge vacations, stretching
from June to November, he went over to Switzerland and Savoy, for
a pedestrian excursion amongst the Alps; taking with him for his
travelling companion a certain Mr. J----, of whom (excepting that he
is once apostrophized in a sonnet, written at Calais in the year 1802)
I never happened to hear him speak: whence I presume to infer that Mr.
J---- owed this flattering distinction, not so much to any intellectual
graces of his society, as, perhaps, to his powers of administering
"punishment" (in the language of the "fancy") to restive and mutinous
landlords; for such were abroad in those days,--people who presented
huge reckonings with one hand, and with the other a huge cudgel, by
way of opening the traveller's eyes to the propriety of settling them
without demur, and without discount. I do not positively know this to
have been the case; but I have heard Wordsworth speak of the ruffian
landlords who played upon his youth in the Grisons; and, however well
qualified to fight his own battles, he might find, amongst such savage
mountaineers, two combatants better than one.

Wordsworth's route, on this occasion, lay at first through Austrian
Flanders, then (1788, I think) on the fret for an insurrectionary war
against the capricious innovations of the imperial coxcomb, Joseph
II. He passed through the camps then forming, and thence ascended the
Rhine to Switzerland; crossed the Great St. Bernard, visited the Lake
of Como, and other interesting scenes in the north of Italy, where,
by the way, the tourists were benighted in a forest--having, in some
way or other, been misled by the Italian clocks and their peculiar
fashion of striking round to twenty-four o'clock. On his return,
Wordsworth published a quarto pamphlet of verses, describing, with
very considerable effect and brilliancy, the grand scenery amongst
which he had been moving.[111] This poem, as well as another in the
same quarto form, describing the English lake scenery of Westmoreland
and Cumberland, addressed by way of letter "to a young lady" (viz.,
Miss Wordsworth),[112] are remarkable, in the first place, as the
earliest effort of Wordsworth in verse, at least as his earliest
publication; but, in the second place, and still more so, from their
style of composition. "Pure description," even where it cannot be said,
sneeringly, "to hold the place of sense," is so little attractive as
the direct exclusive object of a poem, and in reality it exacts so
powerful an effort on the part of the reader to realize visually,
or make into an apprehensible unity, the scattered elements and
circumstances of external landscapes painted only by words, that,
inevitably, and reasonably, it can never hope to be a popular form
of composition; else it is highly probable that these "Descriptive
Sketches" of Wordsworth, though afterwards condemned as vicious in
their principles of composition by his own maturer taste, would really
have gained him a high momentary notoriety with the public, had they
been fairly brought under its notice; whilst, on the other hand, his
revolutionary principles of composition, and his purer taste, ended in
obtaining for him nothing but scorn and ruffian insolence.

This seems marvellous; but, in fact, it is not so: it seems, I mean,
_primâ facie_, marvellous that the inferior models should be fitted
to gain a far higher reputation; but the secret lies here--that these
were in a style of composition which, if sometimes false, had been
long reconciled to the public feelings, and which, besides, have a
specific charm for certain minds, even apart from all fashions of the
day; whereas, his later poems had to struggle against sympathies long
trained in an opposite direction, to which the recovery of a healthier
tone (even where nature had made it possible) presupposed a difficult
process of weaning, and an effort of discipline for re-organizing the
whole internal economy of the sensibilities that is both painful and
mortifying: for--and that is worthy of deep attention--the misgivings
of any vicious or unhealthy state, the impulses and suspicious
gleams of the truth struggling with cherished error, the instincts
of light conflicting with darkness--these are the real causes of
that hatred and intolerant scorn which is ever awakened by the first
dawnings of new and important systems of truth. Therefore it is, that
Christianity was so much more hated than any mere variety of error.
Therefore are the first feeble struggles of nature towards a sounder
state of health always harsh and painful; for the false system which
this change for the better disturbs had, at least, this soothing
advantage--that it was self-consistent. Therefore, also, was the
Wordsworthian restoration of elementary power, and of a higher or
transcendent truth of nature (or, as some people vaguely expressed
the case, of _simplicity_), received at first with such malignant
disgust. For there was a galvanic awakening in the shock of power, as
it jarred against the ancient system of prejudices, which inevitably
revealed so much of truth as made the mind jealous; enlightened it
enough to descry its own wanderings, but not enough to recover the
right road. The more energetic, the more spasmodically potent, are
the throes of nature towards her own re-establishment in the cases of
suspended animation--by drowning, strangling, &c.--the more keen is the
anguish of revival. And, universally, a transition state is a state
of suffering and disquiet. Meantime, the early poems of Wordsworth,
that _might_ have suited the public taste so much better than his more
serious efforts, if the fashion of the hour, or the sanction of a
leading review, or the _prestige_ of a name, had happened to bring them
under the public eye, did, in fact, drop unnoticed into the market.
Nowhere have I seen them quoted--no, not even since the author's
victorious establishment in the public admiration. The reason may be,
however, that not many copies were printed at first; no subsequent
edition was ever called for; and yet, from growing interest in the
author, every copy of the small impression had been studiously bought
up. Indeed, I myself went to the publisher's (Johnson's) as early as
1805 or 1806, and bought up all the remaining copies (which were but
six or seven of the Foreign Sketches, and two or three of the English),
as presents, and as _future_ curiosities in literature to literary
friends whose interest in Wordsworth might assure one of a due value
being put upon the poems. Were it not for this extreme scarcity,
I am disposed to think that many lines or passages would long ere
this have been made familiar to the public ear. Some are delicately,
some forcibly picturesque; and the selection of circumstances is
occasionally very original and felicitous. In particular, I remember
this one, which presents an accident in rural life that must by
thousands of repetitions have become intimately known to every dweller
in the country, and yet had never before been consciously taken up for
a poet's use. After having described the domestic cock as "sweetly
ferocious"--a prettiness of phraseology which he borrows from an
Italian author--he notices those competitions or defiances which are
so often carried on interchangeably between barn-door cocks from great
distances:--

     "Echoed by faintly answering farms remote."

This is the beautiful line in which he has caught and preserved so
ordinary an occurrence--one, in fact, of the commonplaces which lend
animation and a moral interest to rural life.

After his return from this Swiss excursion, Wordsworth took up his
parting residence at Cambridge, and prepared for a final adieu to
academic pursuits and academic society.

It was about this period that the French Revolution broke out; and the
reader who would understand its appalling effects--its convulsing,
revolutionary effects upon Wordsworth's heart and soul--should consult
the history of the Solitary, as given by himself in "The Excursion";
for that picture is undoubtedly a leaf from the personal experience of
Wordsworth:--

     "From that dejection I was roused--but how?"

Mighty was the transformation which it wrought in the whole economy of
his thoughts; miraculous almost was the expansion which it gave to his
human sympathies; chiefly in this it showed its effects--in throwing
the thoughts inwards into grand meditations upon man, his final
destiny, his ultimate capacities of elevation; and, secondly, in giving
to the whole system of the thoughts and feelings a firmer tone, and a
sense of the awful _realities_ which surround the mind; by comparison
with which the previous literary tastes seemed (even where they were
fine and elegant, as in Collins or Gray, unless where they had the
self-sufficing reality of religion, as in Cowper) fanciful and trivial.
In all lands this result was accomplished, and at the same time:
Germany, above all, found her new literature the mere creation and
rebound of this great moral tempest; and, in Germany or England alike,
the poetry was so entirely regenerated, thrown into moulds of thought
and of feeling so new, that the poets everywhere felt themselves to be
putting away childish things, and now first, among those of their own
century, entering upon the dignity and the sincere thinking of mature
manhood.

Wordsworth, it is well known to all who know anything of his history,
felt himself so fascinated by the gorgeous festival era of the
Revolution--that era when the sleeping snakes which afterwards stung
the national felicity were yet covered with flowers--that he went over
to Paris, and spent about one entire year between that city, Orleans,
and Blois. There, in fact, he continued to reside almost too long. He
had been sufficiently connected with public men to have drawn upon
himself some notice from those who afterwards composed the Committee
of Public Safety. And, as an Englishman, when that partiality began
to droop which at an earlier period had protected the English name,
he became an object of gloomy suspicion with those even who would
have grieved that he should fall a victim to undistinguishing popular
violence. Already _for_ England, and in her behalf, he was thought
to be that spy which (as Coleridge tells us in his "Biographia
Literaria") afterwards he was accounted by Mr. Pitt's emissaries, in
the worst of services _against_ her. I doubt, however (let me say it
without impeachment of Coleridge's veracity--for he was easily duped),
this whole story about Mr. Pitt's Somersetshire spies; and it has often
struck me with astonishment that Coleridge should have suffered his
personal pride to take so false a direction as to court the humble
distinction of having been suspected as a conspirator, in those very
years when poor empty tympanies of men, such as Thelwall, Holcroft,
&c., were actually recognised as enemies of the state, and worthy of
a state surveillance, by ministers so blind and grossly misinformed
as, on this point, were Pitt and Dundas. Had I been Coleridge, instead
of saving Mr. Pitt's reputation with posterity, by ascribing to him a
jealousy which he or his agents had not the discernment to cherish, I
would have boldly planted myself upon the fact, the killing fact, that
he had utterly ignored both myself (Coleridge, to wit) and Wordsworth.
Even with Dogberry, _I_ would have insisted upon that--"Set down, also,
that I am an ass!" Clamorous should have been my exultation in this
fact.[113]

In France, however, Wordsworth had a chance, in good earnest, of
passing for the traitor that, in England, no rational person ever
thought him. He had chosen his friends carelessly; nor could any
man, the most sagacious, have chosen them safely, in a time when the
internal schisms of the very same general party brought with them
worse hostilities and more personal perils than even, upon the broader
divisions of party, could have attended the most _ultra_ professions of
anti-national politics, and when the rapid changes of position shifted
the peril from month to month. One individual is especially recorded
by Wordsworth, in the poem on his own life, as a man of the highest
merit, and personal qualities the most brilliant, who ranked first
upon the list of Wordsworth's friends; and this man was so far a safe
friend, at one moment, as he was a republican general--finally, indeed,
a commander-in-chief. This was Beaupuis; and the description of his
character and position is singularly interesting. There is, in fact, a
special value and a use about the case; it opens one's eyes feelingly
to the fact that, even in this thoughtless people, so full of vanity
and levity, nevertheless, the awful temper of the times, and the dread
burden of human interests with which it was charged, had called to a
consciousness of new duties, had summoned to an audit, as if at some
great final tribunal, even the gay, radiant creatures that, under less
solemn auspices, under the reign of a Francis I. or a Louis XIV, would
have been the merest painted butterflies of the court sunshine. This
Beaupuis was a man of superb person--beautiful in a degree which made
him a painter's model, both as to face and figure; and, accordingly, in
a land where conquests of that nature were so easy, and the subjects of
so trifling an effort, he had been distinguished, to his own as well
as the public eyes, by a rapid succession of _bonnes fortunes_ amongst
women. Such, and so glorified by triumphs the most unquestionable and
flattering, had the earthquake of the Revolution found him. From that
moment he had no leisure, not a thought, to bestow upon his former
selfish and frivolous pursuits. He was hurried, as one inspired by some
high apostolic passion, into the service of the unhappy and desolate
serfs amongst his own countrymen--such as are described, at an earlier
date, by Madame de Sevigné, as the victims of feudal institutions;
and one day, as he was walking with Wordsworth in the neighbourhood
of Orleans, and they had turned into a little quiet lane, leading off
from a heath, suddenly they came upon the following spectacle:--A girl,
seventeen or eighteen years old, hunger-bitten, and wasted to a meagre
shadow, was knitting, in a dejected, drooping way; whilst to her arm
was attached, by a rope, the horse, equally famished, that earned the
miserable support of her family. Beaupuis comprehended the scene in a
moment; and, seizing Wordsworth by the arm, he said,--"Dear English
friend!--brother from a nation of freemen!--_that_ it is which is the
curse of our people, in their widest section; and to cure this it is,
as well as to maintain our work against the kings of the earth, that
blood must be shed and tears must flow for many years to come!" At
that time the Revolution had not fulfilled its tendencies; as yet,
the king was on the throne; the fatal 10th of August 1792 had not
dawned; and thus far there was safety for a subject of kings.[114] The
irresistible stream was hurrying forwards. The king fell; and (to pause
for a moment) how divinely is the fact recorded by Wordsworth, in the
MS. poem on his own life, placing the awful scenes past and passing
in Paris under a pathetic relief from the description of the golden,
autumnal day, sleeping in sunshine--

                                   "When I
     Towards the fierce metropolis bent my steps,
     The homeward road to England. From his throne
     The king had fallen," &c.

What a picture does he give of the fury which there possessed the
public mind; of the frenzy which shone in every eye, and through
every gesture; of the stormy groups assembled at the Palais Royal, or
the Tuileries, with "hissing factionists" for ever in their centre,
"hissing" from the self-baffling of their own madness, and incapable
from wrath of speaking clearly; of fear already creeping over the
manners of multitudes; of stealthy movements through back streets;
plotting and counter-plotting in every family; feuds to extermination,
dividing children of the same house for ever; scenes such as those
of the Chapel Royal (now silenced on that _public_ stage), repeating
themselves daily amongst private friends; and, to show the universality
of this maniacal possession--that it was no narrow storm discharging
its fury by local concentration upon a single city, but that it
overspread the whole realm of France--a picture is given, wearing the
same features, of what passed daily at Orleans, Blois, and other towns.
The citizens are described in the attitudes they assumed at the daily
coming in of the post from Paris; the fierce sympathy is portrayed
with which they echoed back the feelings of their compatriots in the
capital: men of all parties had been there up to this time--aristocrats
as well as democrats; and one, in particular, of the former class is
put forward as a representative of his class. This man, duly as the
hour arrived which brought the Parisian newspapers, read restlessly
of the tumults and insults amongst which the Royal Family now passed
their days; of the decrees by which his own order were threatened or
assailed; of the self-expatriation, now continually swelling in amount,
as a measure of despair on the part of myriads, as well priests as
gentry--all this and worse he read in public; and still, as he read,

                       "His hand
     Haunted his sword, like an uneasy spot
     In his own body."

In short, as there never has been so strong a national convulsion
diffused so widely, with equal truth it may be asserted, that no
describer, so powerful, or idealizing so magnificently what he deals
with, has ever been a real living spectator of parallel scenes. The
French, indeed, it may be said, are far enough from being a people
profound in feeling. True; but, of all people, they most exhibit their
feeling on the surface; are the most _demonstrative_ (to use a modern
term), and most of all (except Italians) mark their feelings by outward
expression of gesticulation: not to insist upon the obvious truth--that
even a people of shallow feeling may be deeply moved by tempests which
uproot the forest of a thousand years' growth; by changes in the very
organization of society, such as throw all things, for a time, into one
vast anarchy; and by murderous passions, alternately the effect and
the cause of that same chaotic anarchy. Now, it was in this autumn of
1792, as I have already said, that Wordsworth parted finally from his
illustrious friend--for, all things considered, he may be justly so
entitled--the gallant Beaupuis. This great season of public trial had
searched men's natures; revealed their real hearts; brought into light
and action qualities oftentimes not suspected by their possessors;
and had thrown men, as in elementary states of society, each upon his
own native resources, unaided by the old conventional forces of rank
and birth. Beaupuis had shone to unusual advantage under this general
trial; he had discovered, even to the philosophic eye of Wordsworth,
a depth of benignity very unusual in a Frenchman; and not of local,
contracted benignity, but of large, illimitable, apostolic devotion to
the service of the poor and the oppressed--a fact the more remarkable
as he had all the pretensions in his own person of high birth and
high rank, and, so far as he had any personal interest embarked in
the struggle, should have allied himself with the aristocracy. But of
selfishness in any shape he had no vestiges; or, if he had, it showed
itself in a slight tinge of vanity; yet, no--it was not vanity, but a
radiant quickness of sympathy with the eye which expressed admiring
love--sole relic of the chivalrous devotion once dedicated to the
service of ladies. Now, again, he put on the garb of chivalry; it
was a chivalry the noblest in the world, which opened his ear to the
Pariah and the oppressed all over his misorganized country. A more
apostolic fervour of holy zealotry in this great cause had not been
seen since the days of Bartholomew las Casas, who showed the same
excess of feeling in another direction. This sublime dedication of his
being to a cause which, in his conception of it, extinguished all petty
considerations for himself, and made him thenceforwards a creature of
the national will--"a son of France," in a more eminent and loftier
sense than according to the heraldry of Europe--had extinguished even
his sensibility to the voice of worldly honour. "Injuries," says
Wordsworth--

                   "Injuries
     Made him more gracious."

And so utterly had he submitted his own will or separate interests
to the transcendent voice of his country, which, in the main, he
believed to be now speaking authentically for the first time since the
foundations of Christendom, that, even against the motions of his own
heart, he adopted the hatreds of the young republic, growing cruel in
his purposes towards the ancient oppressor, out of very excess of love
for the oppressed; and, against the voice of his own order, as well as
in stern oblivion of many early friendships, he became the champion
of democracy in the struggle everywhere commencing with prejudice
or feudal privilege. Nay, he went so far upon the line of this new
crusade against the evils of the world that he even accepted, with a
conscientious defiance of his own quiet homage to the erring spirit of
loyalty embarked upon that cause, a commission in the Republican armies
preparing to move against La Vendée; and, finally, in that cause,
as commander-in-chief, he laid down his life. "He perished," says
Wordsworth--

     "He perished fighting, in supreme command,
     Upon the banks of the unhappy Loire."

Homewards fled all the English from a land which now was fast making
ready the shambles for its noblest citizens. Thither also came
Wordsworth; and there he spent his time for a year and more chiefly
in London, overwhelmed with shame and despondency for the disgrace
and scandal brought upon Liberty by the atrocities committed in that
holy name. Upon this subject he dwells with deep emotion in the poem
on his own life; and he records the awful triumph for retribution
accomplished which possessed him when crossing the sands of the great
Bay of Morecamb from Lancaster to Ulverstone, and hearing from a
horseman who passed him, in reply to the question--_Was there any
news?_--"Yes, that Robespierre had perished." Immediately a passion
seized him, a transport of almost epileptic fervour, prompting him, as
he stood alone upon this perilous[115] waste of sands, to shout aloud
anthems of thanksgiving for this great vindication of eternal justice.
Still, though justice was done upon one great traitor to the cause,
the cause itself was overcast with clouds too heavily to find support
and employment for the hopes of a poet who had believed in a golden
era ready to open upon the prospects of human nature. It gratified and
solaced his heart that the indignation of mankind should have wreaked
itself upon the chief monsters that had outraged their nature and
their hopes; but for the present he found it necessary to comfort his
disappointment by turning away from politics to studies less capable of
deceiving his expectations.

From this period, therefore--that is, from the year 1794-95--we may
date the commencement of Wordsworth's entire self-dedication to poetry
as the study and main business of his life. Somewhere about this period
also (though, according to my remembrance of what Miss Wordsworth once
told me, I think one year or so later) his sister joined him; and they
began[116] to keep house together: once at Race Down, in Dorsetshire;
once at Clevedon, on the coast of Somersetshire; then amongst the
Quantock Hills, in the same county, or in that neighbourhood;
particularly at Alfoxton, a beautiful country-house, with a grove and
shrubbery attached, belonging to Mr. St. Aubyn, a minor, and let (I
believe) on the terms of keeping the house in repair. Whilst resident
at this last place it was, as I have generally understood, and in
the year 1797 or 1798, that Wordsworth first became acquainted with
Coleridge; though possibly in the year I am wrong; for it occurs to me
that, in a poem of Coleridge's dated in 1796, there is an allusion to a
young writer of the name of Wordsworth as one who had something austere
in his style, but otherwise was more original than any other poet of
the age; and it is probable that this knowledge of the poetry would
be subsequent to a personal knowledge of the author, considering the
little circulation which any poetry of a Wordsworthian stamp would be
likely to attain at that time.

It was at Alfoxton that Miss Mary Hutchinson visited her cousins the
Wordsworths, and there, or previously in the north of England, at
Stockton-upon-Tees and Darlington, that the attachment began between
Miss Mary Hutchinson and Wordsworth which terminated in their marriage
about the beginning of the present century. The marriage took place
in the north; somewhere, I believe, in Yorkshire; and, immediately
after the ceremony, Wordsworth brought his bride to Grasmere; in which
most lovely of English valleys he had previously obtained, upon a
lease of seven or eight years, the cottage in which I found him living
at my first visit to him in November 1807. I have heard that there
was a paragraph inserted on this occasion in the "Morning Post" or
"Courier"--and I have an indistinct remembrance of having once seen it
myself--which described this event of the poet's marriage in the most
ludicrous terms of silly pastoral sentimentality; the cottage being
described as "the abode of content and all the virtues," the vale
itself in the same puerile slang, and the whole event in the style of
allegorical trifling about the Muses, &c. The masculine and severe
taste of Wordsworth made him peculiarly open to annoyance from such
absurd trifling; and, unless his sense of the ludicrous overpowered
his graver feelings, he must have been much displeased with the
paragraph. But, after all, I have understood that the whole affair was
an unseasonable jest of Coleridge's or Lamb's.

To us who, in after years, were Wordsworth's friends, or, at least,
intimate acquaintances--viz., to Professor Wilson and myself--the most
interesting circumstance in this marriage, the one which perplexed us
exceedingly, was the very possibility that it should ever have been
brought to bear. For we could not conceive of Wordsworth as submitting
his faculties to the humilities and devotion of courtship. That
self-surrender--that prostration of mind by which a man is too happy
and proud to express the profundity of his service to the woman of his
heart--it seemed a mere impossibility that ever Wordsworth should be
brought to feel for a single instant; and what he did not sincerely
feel, assuredly he was not the person to profess. Wordsworth, I take
it upon myself to say, had not the feelings within him which make this
total devotion to a woman possible. There never lived a woman whom he
would not have lectured and admonished under circumstances that should
have seemed to require it; nor would he have conversed with her in
any mood whatever without wearing an air of mild condescension to her
understanding. To lie at her feet, to make her his idol, to worship her
very caprices, and to adore the most unreasonable of her frowns--these
things were impossible to Wordsworth; and, being so, never could he, in
any emphatic sense, have been a lover.

A lover, I repeat, in any passionate sense of the word, Wordsworth
could not have been. And, moreover, it is remarkable that a woman who
could dispense with that sort of homage in her suitor is not of a
nature to inspire such a passion. That same meekness which reconciles
her to the tone of superiority and freedom in the manner of her suitor,
and which may afterwards in a wife become a sweet domestic grace,
strips her of that too charming irritation, captivating at once and
tormenting, which lurks in feminine pride. If there be an enchantress's
spell yet surviving in this age of ours, it is the haughty grace
of maidenly pride--the womanly sense of dignity, even when most in
excess, and expressed in the language of scorn--which tortures a man
and lacerates his heart, at the same time that it pierces him with
admiration:--

     "Oh, what a world of scorn looks beautiful
     In the contempt and anger of her lip!"

And she who spares a man the agitations of this thraldom robs him no
less of its divinest transports. Wordsworth, however, who never could
have laid aside his own nature sufficiently to have played _his_ part
in such an impassioned courtship, by suiting himself to this high
sexual pride with the humility of a lover, quite as little could have
enjoyed the spectacle of such a pride, or have viewed it in any degree
as an attraction: it would to him have been a pure vexation. Looking
down even upon the lady of his heart, as upon the rest of the world,
from the eminence of his own intellectual superiority--viewing her, in
fact, as a child--he would be much more disposed to regard any airs of
feminine disdain she might assume as the impertinence of girlish levity
than as the caprice of womanly pride; and much I fear that, in any case
of dispute, he would have called even his mistress, "Child! child!" and
perhaps even (but this I do not say with the same certainty) might have
bid her hold her tongue.

If, however, no lover, in a proper sense,--though, from many exquisite
passages, one might conceive that at some time of his life he was, as
especially from the inimitable stanzas beginning--

     "When she I loved was strong and gay,
     And like a rose in June,"

or perhaps (but less powerfully so, because here the passion, though
profound, is less the _peculiar_ passion of love) from the impassioned
lamentation for "the pretty Barbara," beginning--

     "'Tis said that some have died for love:
     And here and there, amidst unhallow'd ground
     In the cold north," &c.,--

yet, if no lover, or (which some of us have sometimes thought) a lover
disappointed at some earlier period, by the death of her he loved, or
by some other fatal event (for he always preserved a mysterious silence
on the subject of that "Lucy," repeatedly alluded to or apostrophized
in his poems); at all events he made what for him turned out a happy
marriage. Few people have lived on such terms of entire harmony and
affection as he lived with the woman of his final choice. Indeed, the
sweetness, almost unexampled, of temper, which shed so sunny a radiance
over Mrs. Wordsworth's manners, sustained by the happy life she led,
the purity of her conscience, and the uniformity of her good health,
made it impossible for anybody to have quarrelled with _her_; and
whatever fits of ill-temper Wordsworth might have--for, with all his
philosophy, he had such fits--met with no fuel to support them, except
in the more irritable temperament of his sister. She was all fire, and
an ardour which, like that of the first Lord Shaftesbury,

     "O'er-informed its tenement of clay";

and, as this ardour looked out in every gleam of her wild eyes (those
"wild eyes" so finely noticed in the "Tintern Abbey"), as it spoke
in every word of her self-baffled utterance, as it gave a trembling
movement to her very person and demeanour--easily enough it might
happen that any apprehension of an unkind word should with her kindle
a dispute. It might have happened; and yet, to the great honour of
both, having such impassioned temperaments, rarely it did happen; and
this was the more remarkable, as I have been assured that both were,
in childhood, irritable or even ill-tempered, and they were constantly
together; for Miss Wordsworth was always ready to walk out--wet or dry,
storm or sunshine, night or day; whilst Mrs. Wordsworth was completely
dedicated to her maternal duties, and rarely left the house, unless
when the weather was tolerable, or, at least, only for short rambles. I
should not have noticed this trait in Wordsworth's occasional manners,
had it been gathered from domestic or confidential opportunities.
But, on the contrary, the first two occasions on which, after months'
domestic intercourse with Wordsworth, I became aware of his possible
ill-humour and peevishness, were so public, that others, and those
strangers, must have been equally made parties to the scene. This scene
occurred in Kendal.

Having brought down the history of Wordsworth to the time of his
marriage, I am reminded by that event to mention the singular good
fortune, in all points of worldly prosperity, which has accompanied him
through life. His marriage--the capital event of life--was fortunate,
and inaugurated a long succession of other prosperities. He has himself
described, in his "Leech-Gatherer,"[118] the fears that at one time, or
at least in some occasional moments of his life, haunted him, lest at
some period or other he might be reserved for poverty. "Cold, pain, and
hunger, and all fleshly ills," occurred to his boding apprehension, and
"mighty poets in their misery dead."

And, at starting on his career of life, certainly no man had plainer
reasons for anticipating the worst evils that have ever persecuted
poets, excepting only two reasons which might warrant him in hoping
better; and these two were--his great prudence, and the temperance of
his daily life. He could not be betrayed into foolish engagements; he
could not be betrayed into expensive habits. Profusion and extravagance
had no hold over him, by any one passion or taste. He was not luxurious
in anything; was not vain or even careful of external appearances
(not, at least, since he had left Cambridge, and visited a mighty
nation in civil convulsions); was not even in the article of books
expensive. Very few books sufficed him; he was careless habitually of
all the current literature, or indeed of any literature that could not
be considered as enshrining the very ideal, capital, and elementary
grandeur of the human intellect. In this extreme limitation of his
literary sensibilities he was as much assisted by that accident of
his own intellectual condition--viz. extreme, intense, unparalleled
_onesidedness_ (_einseitigkeit_)--as by any peculiar sanity of feeling.
Thousands of books that have given rapturous delight to millions of
ingenuous minds for Wordsworth were absolutely a dead letter--closed
and sealed up from his sensibilities and his powers of appreciation,
not less than colours from a blind man's eye. Even the few books which
his peculiar mind had made indispensable to him were not in such a
sense indispensable as they would have been to a man of more sedentary
habits. He lived in the open air, and the enormity of pleasure which
both he and his sister drew from the common appearances of nature and
their everlasting variety--variety so infinite that, if no one leaf of
a tree or shrub ever exactly resembled another in all its filaments and
their arrangement, still less did any one day ever repeat another in
all its pleasurable elements. This pleasure was to him in the stead of
many libraries:--

     "One impulse, from a vernal wood,
       Could teach him more of Man,
     Of moral evil and of good,
       Than all the sages can."

And he, we may be sure, who could draw,

     "Even from the meanest flower that blows,
     Thoughts that do often lie too deep for tears,"--

to whom the mere daisy, the pansy, the primrose, could furnish
pleasures--not the puerile ones which his most puerile and worldly
insulters imagined, but pleasures drawn from depths of reverie and
meditative tenderness far beyond all power of _their_ hearts to
conceive: that man would hardly need any large variety of books. In
fact, there were only two provinces of literature in which Wordsworth
could be looked upon as decently well read--Poetry and Ancient History.
Nor do I believe that he would much have lamented, on his own account,
if all books had perished, excepting the entire body of English Poetry,
and, perhaps, "Plutarch's Lives."

With these simple or rather austere tastes, Wordsworth (it might seem)
had little reason to fear poverty, supposing him in possession of any
moderate income; but meantime he had none. About the time when he left
college, I have good grounds for believing that his whole regular
income was precisely = 0. Some fragments must have survived from the
funds devoted to his education; and with these, no doubt, he supported
the expenses of his Continental tours, and his year's residence in
France. But, at length, "cold, pain, and hunger, and all fleshly ills,"
must have stared him in the face pretty earnestly. And hope of longer
evading an unpleasant destiny of daily toil, in some form or other,
there seemed absolutely none. "For," as he himself expostulates with
himself--

     "For how can _he_ expect that others should
     Sow for him, build for _him_, and, at his call,
     Love him, who for himself will take no thought at all?"

In this dilemma, he had all but resolved, as Miss Wordsworth once told
me, to take pupils; and perhaps _that_, though odious enough, was the
sole resource he had; for Wordsworth never acquired any popular talent
of writing for the current press; and, at that period of his life, he
was gloomily unfitted for bending to such a yoke. In this crisis of
his fate it was that Wordsworth, for once, and once only, became a
martyr to some nervous affection. _That_ raised pity; but I could not
forbear smiling at the remedy, or palliation, which his few friends
adopted. Every night they played at cards with him, as the best mode
of beguiling his sense of distress, whatever that might be: _cards_,
which, in any part of the thirty-and-one years since I have known
Wordsworth, could have had as little power to interest him, or to
cheat him of sorrow, as marbles or a top. However, so it was; for my
information could not be questioned: it came from Miss Wordsworth.

The crisis, as I have said, had arrived for determining the future
colour of his life. Memorable it is, that exactly in those critical
moments when some decisive step had first become necessary, there
happened the first instance of Wordsworth's good luck; and equally
memorable that, at measured intervals throughout the long sequel of his
life since then, a regular succession of similar but superior windfalls
have fallen in, to sustain his expenditure, in exact concurrence with
the growing claims upon his purse. A more fortunate man, I believe,
does not exist than Wordsworth. The aid which now dropped from heaven,
as it were, to enable him to range at will in paths of his own
choosing, and

                   "Finally array
     His temples with the Muses diadem,"

came in the shape of a bequest from Raisley Calvert, a young man of
good family in Cumberland, who died about this time of pulmonary
consumption. A very remarkable young man he must have been, this
Raisley Calvert, to have discerned, at this early period, that future
superiority in Wordsworth which so few people suspected. He was the
brother of a Cumberland gentleman, whom slightly I know; a generous
man, doubtless; for he made no sort of objections (though legally, I
have heard, he might) to his brother's farewell memorial of regard;
a good man to all his dependants, as I have generally understood, in
the neighbourhood of Windy Brow, his mansion, near Keswick; and, as
Southey always said (who must know better than I could do), a man of
strong natural endowments; else, as his talk was of oxen, I might have
made the mistake of supposing him to be, in heart and soul, what he
was in profession--a mere farming country gentleman, whose ambition
was chiefly directed to the turning up of mighty turnips. The sum
left by Raisley Calvert was £900; and it was laid out in an annuity.
This was the basis of Wordsworth's prosperity in life; and upon this
he has built up, by a series of accessions, in which each step, taken
separately for itself, seems perfectly natural, whilst the total result
has undoubtedly something wonderful about it, the present goodly
edifice of his fortunes. Next in the series came the present Lord
Lonsdale's repayment of his predecessor's debt. Upon that, probably, it
was that Wordsworth felt himself entitled to marry. Then, I believe,
came some fortune with Miss Hutchinson; then--that is, fourthly--some
worthy uncle of the same lady was pleased to betake himself to a better
world, leaving to various nieces, and especially to Mrs. Wordsworth,
something or other--I forget what, but it was expressed by thousands
of pounds. At this moment, Wordsworth's family had begun to increase;
and the worthy old uncle, like everybody else in Wordsworth's case,
finding his property very clearly "wanted," and, as people would tell
him, "bespoke," felt how very indelicate it would look for him to
stay any longer in this world; and so off he moved. But Wordsworth's
family, and the wants of that family, still continued to increase;
and the next person--viz., the fifth--who stood in the way, and must,
therefore, have considered himself rapidly growing into a nuisance,
was the stamp-distributor for the county of Westmoreland. About March
1814, I think it was, that his very comfortable situation was wanted.
Probably it took a month for the news to reach him; because in April,
and not before, feeling that he had received a proper notice to quit,
he, good man (this stamp-distributor), like all the rest, distributed
himself and his office into two different places--the latter falling,
of course, into the hands of Wordsworth.

This office, which it was Wordsworth's pleasure to speak of as
"a little one," yielded, I believe, somewhere about £500 a year.
Gradually, even _that_, with all former sources of income, became
insufficient; which ought not to surprise anybody; for a son at Oxford,
as a gentleman commoner, would spend, at the least, £300 per annum; and
there were other children. Still, it is wrong to say that it _had_
become insufficient; as usual, it had not come to that; but, on the
first symptoms arising that it soon _would_ come to that, somebody, of
course, had notice to consider himself a sort of nuisance-elect;--in
this case, it was the distributor of stamps for the county of
Cumberland. His district was absurdly large; and what so reasonable as
that he should submit to a Polish partition of his profits--no, not
Polish; for, on reflection, such a partition neither was nor could be
attempted with regard to an actual incumbent. But then, since people
had such consideration for him as not to remodel the office so long
as he lived, on the other hand, the least he could do for "people"
in return--so as to show his sense of this consideration--was not
to trespass on so much goodness longer than necessary. Accordingly,
here, as in all cases before, the _Deus ex machinâ_ who invariably
interfered when any _nodus_ arose in Wordsworth's affairs, such as
could be considered _vindice dignus_, caused the distributor to
begone into a region where no stamps are wanted, about the very
month, or so, when an additional £400 per annum became desirable.
This, or perhaps more, was understood to have been added, by the new
arrangement, to the Westmoreland distributorship; the small towns of
Keswick and Cockermouth, together with the important one of Whitehaven,
being severed, under this remodelling, from their old dependency on
Cumberland (to which geographically they belonged), and transferred
to the small territory of rocky Westmoreland, the sum total of whose
inhabitants was at that time not much above 50,000; of which number,
one-third, or nearly so, was collected into the only important town
of Kendal; but, of the other two-thirds, a larger proportion was a
simple agricultural or pastoral population than anywhere else in
England. In Westmoreland, therefore, it may be supposed that the stamp
demand could not have been so great, not perhaps by three-quarters,
as in Cumberland; which, besides having a population at least three
times as large, had more and larger towns. The result of this new
distribution was something that approached to an equalization of the
districts--giving to each, as was said, in round terms, a thousand a
year.

Thus I have traced Wordsworth's ascent through its several steps and
stages, to what, for his moderate desires and habits so philosophic,
may be fairly considered opulence. And it must rejoice every man who
joins in the public homage _now_ rendered to his powers (and what man
is to be found that, more or less, does not?) to hear, with respect
to one so lavishly endowed by nature, that he has not been neglected
by fortune; that he has never had the finer edge of his sensibilities
dulled by the sad anxieties, the degrading fears, the miserable
dependencies of debt; that he has been blessed with competency even
when poorest; has had hope and cheerful prospects in reversion through
every stage of his life; that at all times he has been liberated from
_reasonable_ anxieties about the final interests of his children;
that at all times he has been blessed with leisure, the very amplest
that ever man enjoyed, for intellectual pursuits the most delightful;
yes, that, even as regards those delicate and coy pursuits, he has
possessed, in combination, all the conditions for their most perfect
culture--the leisure, the ease, the solitude, the society, the
domestic peace, the local scenery--Paradise for his eye, in Miltonic
beauty, lying outside his windows, Paradise for his heart, in the
perpetual happiness of his own fireside; and, finally, when increasing
years might be supposed to demand something more of modern luxuries,
and expanding intercourse with society something more of refined
elegancies, that his means, still keeping pace in almost arithmetical
ratio with his wants, had shed the graces of art upon the failing
powers of nature, had stripped infirmity of discomfort, and (so far as
the necessities of things will allow) had placed the final stages of
life, by means of many compensations, by universal praise, by plaudits
reverberated from senates, benedictions wherever his poems have
penetrated, honour, troops of friends--in short, by all that miraculous
prosperity can do to evade the primal decrees of nature, had placed the
final stages upon a level with the first.

But now, reverting to the subject of Wordsworth's prosperity, I
have numbered up six separate stages of good luck--six instances of
pecuniary showers emptying themselves into his very bosom, at the very
moments when they _began_ to be needed, on the first symptoms that
they might be wanted--accesses of fortune stationed upon his road like
repeating frigates, connecting, to all appearance, some preconcerted
line of operations, and, amidst the tumults of chance, wearing as much
the air of purpose and design as if they supported a human plan. I
have come down to the sixth case. Whether there were any seventh, I
do not know: but confident I feel that, had a seventh been required
by circumstances, a seventh would have happened. So true it is that
still, as Wordsworth needed a place or a fortune, the holder of that
place or fortune was immediately served with a summons to surrender it:
so certainly was this impressed upon my belief, as one of the blind
necessities making up the prosperity and fixed destiny of Wordsworth,
that, for myself, had I happened to know of any peculiar adaptation
in an estate or office of mine to an existing need of Wordsworth's,
forthwith, and with the speed of a man running for his life, I would
have laid it down at his feet. "Take it," I should have said; "take it,
or in three weeks I shall be a dead man."

Well, let me pause: I think the reader is likely by this time to have
a slight notion of _my_ notion of Wordsworth's inevitable prosperity,
and the sort of _lien_ that he had upon the incomes of other men who
happened to stand in his way. The same prosperity attended the other
branches of the family, with the single exception of John, the brother
who perished in the _Abergavenny_: and even he was prosperous up to
the moment of his fatal accident. As to Miss Wordsworth, who will, by
some people, be classed amongst the non-prosperous, I rank her amongst
the most fortunate of women; or, at least, if regard be had to that
period of life which is most capable of happiness. Her fortune, after
its repayment by Lord Lonsdale, was, much of it, confided, with a
sisterly affection, to the use of her brother John; and part of it,
I have heard, perished in his ship. How much, I never felt myself
entitled to ask; but certainly a part was on that occasion understood
to have been lost irretrievably. Either it was that only a partial
insurance had been effected; or else the nature of the accident, being
in home waters (off the coast of Dorsetshire), might, by the nature of
the contract, have taken the case out of the benefit of the policy.
This loss, however, had it even been total, for a single sister
amongst a family of flourishing brothers, could not be of any lasting
importance. A much larger number of voices would proclaim her to have
been unfortunate in life because she made no marriage connexion; and
certainly, the insipid as well as unfeeling ridicule which descends so
plentifully upon those women who, perhaps from strength of character,
have refused to make such a connexion where it promised little of
elevated happiness, _does_ make the state of singleness somewhat of a
trial to the patience of many; and to many the vexation of this trial
has proved a snare for beguiling them of their honourable resolutions.
Meantime, as the opportunities are rare in which all the conditions
concur for happy marriage connexions, how important it is that the
dignity of high-minded women should be upheld by society in the
honourable election they make of a self-dependent virgin seclusion,
by preference to a heartless marriage! Such women, as Mrs. Trollope
justly remarks, fill a place in society which in their default would
_not_ be filled, and are available for duties requiring a tenderness
and a punctuality that could not be looked for from women preoccupied
with household or maternal claims. If there were no regular fund (so to
speak) of women free from conjugal and maternal duties, upon what body
could we draw for our "sisters of mercy," &c.? In another point Mrs.
Trollope is probably right: few women live unmarried from necessity.
Miss Wordsworth had several offers; amongst them, to my knowledge, one
from Hazlitt; all of them she rejected decisively. And she did right. A
happier life, by far, was hers in youth, coming as near as difference
of scenery and difference of relations would permit to that which was
promised to Ruth--the Ruth of her brother's creation[120]--by the
youth who came from Georgia's shore; for, though not upon American
savannah, or Canadian lakes,

       "With all their fairy crowds
     Of islands, that together lie
     As quietly as spots of sky
       Amongst the evening clouds,"

yet, amongst the loveliest scenes of sylvan England, and (at intervals)
of sylvan Germany--amongst lakes, too, far better fitted to give the
_sense_ of their own character than the vast inland _seas_ of America,
and amongst mountains more romantic than many of the chief ranges in
that country--her time fleeted away like some golden age, or like the
life of primeval man; and she, like Ruth, was for years allowed

     "To run, though _not_ a bride,
     A sylvan huntress, by the side"

of him to whom she, like Ruth, had dedicated her days, and to whose
children, afterwards, she dedicated a love like that of mothers. Dear
Miss Wordsworth! How noble a creature did she seem when I first knew
her!--and when, on the very first night which I passed in her brother's
company, he read to me, in illustration of something he was saying, a
passage from Fairfax's "Tasso," ending pretty nearly with these words,

     "Amidst the broad fields and the endless wood,
     The lofty lady kept her maidenhood,"

I thought that, possibly, he had his sister in his thoughts. Yet
"lofty" was hardly the right word. Miss Wordsworth was too ardent
and fiery a creature to maintain the reserve essential to dignity;
and dignity was the last thing one thought of in the presence of one
so natural, so fervent in her feelings, and so embarrassed in their
utterance--sometimes, also, in the attempt to check them. It must
not, however, be supposed that there was any silliness or weakness of
enthusiasm about her. She was under the continual restraint of severe
good sense, though liberated from that false shame which, in so many
persons, accompanies all expressions of natural emotion; and she had
too long enjoyed the ennobling conversation of her brother, and his
admirable comments on the poets, which they read in common, to fail
in any essential point of logic or propriety of thought. Accordingly,
her letters, though the most careless and un-elaborate--nay, the
most hurried that can be imagined--are models of good sense and just
feeling. In short, beyond any person I have known in this world, Miss
Wordsworth was the creature of impulse; but, as a woman most thoroughly
virtuous and well-principled, as one who could not fail to be kept
right by her own excellent heart, and as an intellectual creature from
her cradle, with much of her illustrious brother's peculiarity of
mind--finally, as one who had been, in effect, educated and trained
by that very brother--she won the sympathy and the respectful regard
of every man worthy to approach her. Properly, and in a spirit of
prophecy, was she named _Dorothy_; in its Greek meaning,[121] _gift of
God_, well did this name prefigure the relation in which she stood to
Wordsworth, the mission with which she was charged--to wait upon him as
the tenderest and most faithful of domestics; to love him as a sister;
to sympathize with him as a confidante; to counsel him; to cheer him
and sustain him by the natural expression of her feelings--so quick, so
ardent, so unaffected--upon the probable effect of whatever thoughts or
images he might conceive; finally, and above all other ministrations,
to ingraft, by her sexual sense of beauty, upon his masculine austerity
that delicacy and those graces which else (according to the grateful
acknowledgments of his own maturest retrospect) it never could have
had:--

     "The blessing of my later years
       with me when I was a boy:
     She gave me hopes, she gave me fears,
     A heart the fountain of sweet tears,
        . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
       And love, and thought, and joy."

And elsewhere he describes her, in a philosophic poem, still in
MS.,[122] as one who planted flowers and blossoms with her feminine
hand upon what might else have been an arid rock--massy, indeed, and
grand, but repulsive from the severity of its features. I may sum up
in one brief abstract the amount of Miss Wordsworth's character, as
a companion, by saying, that she was the very wildest (in the sense
of the most natural) person I have ever known; and also the truest,
most inevitable, and at the same time the quickest and readiest in her
sympathy with either joy or sorrow, with laughter or with tears, with
the realities of life or the larger realities of the poets!

Meantime, amidst all this fascinating furniture of her mind, won from
nature, from solitude, from enlightened companionship, Miss Wordsworth
was as thoroughly deficient (some would say painfully deficient--I say
charmingly deficient) in ordinary female accomplishments as "Cousin
Mary" in dear Miss Mitford's delightful sketch. Of French, she might
have barely enough to read a plain modern page of narrative; Italian,
I question whether any; German, just enough to insult the German
literati, by showing how little she had found them or their writings
necessary to her heart. The "Luise" of Voss, the "Hermann und Dorothea"
of Goethe she had begun to translate, as young ladies do "Télémaque";
but, like them, had chiefly cultivated the first two pages[123]; with
the third she had a slender acquaintance, and with the fourth she
meditated an intimacy at some future day. Music, in her solitary and
out-of-doors life, she could have little reason for cultivating; nor
is it possible that any woman can draw the enormous energy requisite
for this attainment, upon a _modern_ scale of perfection, out of
any other principle than that of vanity (at least of great value for
social applause) or else of deep musical sensibility; neither of which
belonged to Miss Wordsworth's constitution of mind. But, as everybody
agrees in our days to think this accomplishment of no value whatever,
and, in fact, _unproduceable_, unless existing in an exquisite state
of culture, no complaint could be made on that score, nor any surprise
felt. But the case in which the irregularity of Miss Wordsworth's
education _did_ astonish one was in that part which respected her
literary knowledge. In whatever she read, or neglected to read, she had
obeyed the single impulse of her own heart; where that led her, _there_
she followed: where that was mute or indifferent, not a thought had
she to bestow upon a writer's high reputation, or the call for some
acquaintance with his works to meet the demands of society. And thus
the strange anomaly arose, of a woman deeply acquainted with some great
authors, whose works lie pretty much out of the fashionable beat; able,
moreover, in her own person, to produce brilliant effects; able on some
subjects to write delightfully, and with the impress of originality
upon all she uttered; and yet ignorant of great classical works in her
own mother tongue, and careless of literary history in a degree which
at once exiled her from the rank and privileges of _bluestockingism_.

The reader may, perhaps, have objected silently to the illustration
drawn from Miss Mitford, that "Cousin Mary" does not effect her
fascinations out of pure negations. Such negations, from the mere
startling effect of their oddity in this present age, might fall
in with the general current of her attractions; but Cousin Mary's
undoubtedly lay in the _positive_ witcheries of a manner and a
character transcending, by force of irresistible nature (as in a
similar case recorded by Wordsworth in "The Excursion") all the pomp
of nature and art united as seen in ordinary creatures. Now, in
Miss Wordsworth, there were certainly no "Cousin Mary" fascinations
of manner and deportment, that snatch a grace beyond the reach
of art: _there_ she was, indeed, painfully deficient; for hurry
mars and defeats even the most ordinary expression of the feminine
character--viz. its gentleness: abruptness and trepidation leave often
a joint impression of what seems for an instant both rudeness and
ungracefulness: and the least painful impression was that of unsexual
awkwardness. But the point in which Miss Wordsworth made the most ample
amends for all that she wanted of more customary accomplishments, was
this very originality and native freshness of intellect, which settled
with so bewitching an effect upon some of her writings, and upon
many a sudden remark or ejaculation, extorted by something or other
that struck her eye, in the clouds, or in colouring, or in accidents
of light and shade, of form or combination of form. To talk of her
"writings" is too pompous an expression, or at least far beyond any
pretensions that she ever made for herself. Of poetry she has written
little indeed; and that little not, in my opinion, of much merit.
The verses published by her brother, and beginning, "Which way does
the wind come?", meant only as nursery lines, are certainly wild and
pretty; but the other specimen is likely to strike most readers as
feeble and trivial in the sentiment. Meantime, the book which is in
very deed a monument to her power of catching and expressing all the
hidden beauties of natural scenery, with a felicity of diction, a
truth and strength, that far transcend Gilpin, or professional writers
on those subjects, is her record of a _first_ tour in Scotland, made
about the year 1802. This MS. book (unless my recollection of it,
from a period now gone by for thirty years, has deceived me greatly)
is absolutely unique in its class; and, though it never could be very
popular, from the minuteness of its details, intelligible only to the
eye, and the luxuriation of its descriptions, yet I believe no person
has ever been favoured with a sight of it that has not yearned for
its publication. Its own extraordinary merit, apart from the interest
which _now_ invests the name of Wordsworth, could not fail to procure
purchasers for one edition on its first appearance.[124]

Coleridge was of the party at first; but afterwards, under some
attack of rheumatism, found or thought it necessary to leave them.
Melancholy it would be at this time, thirty-six years and more from
the era of that tour, to read it under the afflicting remembrances
of all which has been suffered in the interval by two at least out
of the three who composed the travelling party; for I fear that Miss
Wordsworth has suffered not much less than Coleridge, and, in any
general expression of it, from the same cause, viz. an excess of
pleasurable excitement and luxurious sensibility, sustained in youth
by a constitutional glow from animal causes, but drooping as soon as
that was withdrawn. It is painful to point a moral from any story
connected with those whom one loves or has loved; painful to look for
one moment towards any "improvement" of such a case, especially where
there is no reason to tax the parties with any criminal contribution
to their own sufferings, except through that relaxation of the will
and its potential energies through which most of us, at some time or
other--I myself too deeply and sorrowfully--stand accountable to our
own consciences. Not, therefore, with any intention of speaking in a
monitorial or censorial character, do I here notice a defect in Miss
Wordsworth's self-education of something that might have mitigated the
sort of suffering which, more or less, ever since the period of her
too genial, too radiant youth, I suppose her to have struggled with.
I have mentioned the narrow basis on which her literary interests had
been made to rest--the exclusive character of her reading, and the
utter want of pretension, and of all that looks like _bluestockingism_,
in the style of her habitual conversation and mode of dealing with
literature. Now, to me it appears, upon reflection, that it would
have been far better had Miss Wordsworth condescended a little to the
ordinary mode of pursuing literature; better for her own happiness
if she _had_ been a bluestocking; or, at least, if she had been, in
good earnest, a writer for the press, with the pleasant cares and
solicitudes of one who has some little ventures, as it were, on that
vast ocean.

We all know with how womanly and serene a temper literature has
been pursued by Joanna Baillie, by Miss Mitford, and other women
of admirable genius--with how absolutely no sacrifice or loss of
feminine dignity they have cultivated the profession of authorship;
and, if we could hear their report, I have no doubt that the little
cares of correcting proofs, and the forward-looking solicitudes
connected with the mere business arrangements of new publications,
would be numbered amongst the minor pleasures of life; whilst the
more elevated cares connected with the intellectual business of such
projects must inevitably have done much to solace the troubles which,
as human beings, they cannot but have experienced, and even to scatter
flowers upon their path. Mrs. Johnstone of Edinburgh has pursued the
profession of literature--the noblest of professions, and the only
one open to both sexes alike--with even more assiduity, and as a
_daily_ occupation; and, I have every reason to believe, with as much
benefit to her own happiness as to the instruction and amusement of
her readers; for the petty cares of authorship are agreeable, and its
serious cares are ennobling.[125] More especially is such an occupation
useful to a woman without children, and without any _prospective_
resources--resources in objects that involve hopes growing and
unfulfilled. It is too much to expect of any woman (or man either) that
her mind should support itself in a pleasurable activity, under the
drooping energies of life, by resting on the past or on the present;
some interest in reversion, some subject of hope from day to day, must
be called in to reinforce the animal fountains of good spirits. Had
that been opened for Miss Wordsworth, I am satisfied that she would
have passed a more cheerful middle-age, and would not, at any period,
have yielded to that nervous depression (or is it, perhaps, nervous
irritation?) which, I grieve to hear, has clouded her latter days.
Nephews and nieces, whilst young and innocent, are as good almost as
sons and daughters to a fervid and loving heart that has carried them
in her arms from the hour they were born. But, after a nephew has grown
into a huge hulk of a man, six feet high, and as stout as a bullock;
after he has come to have children of his own, lives at a distance,
and finds occasion to talk much of oxen and turnips--no offence to
him!--he ceases to be an object of any very profound sentiment.
There is nothing in such a subject to rouse the flagging pulses of
the heart, and to sustain a fervid spirit, to whom, at the very best,
human life offers little of an adequate or sufficing interest, unless
when idealized by the magic of the mighty poets. Farewell, Miss
Wordsworth! farewell, impassioned Dorothy! I have not seen you for many
a day--shall, too probably, never see you again; but shall attend your
steps with tender interest so long as I hear of you living: so will
Professor Wilson; and, from two hearts at least, that knew and admired
you in your fervid prime, it may sometimes cheer the gloom of your
depression to be assured of never-failing remembrance, full of love and
respectful pity.

That night--the first of my personal intercourse with
Wordsworth--the first in which I saw him face to face--was
(it is little, indeed, to say) memorable: it was marked by a
change even in the physical condition of my nervous system.
Long disappointment--hope for ever baffled (and why should
it be less painful because _self_-baffled?)--vexation and
self-blame, almost self-contempt, at my own want of courage
to face the man whom of all since the Flood I most yearned to
behold:--these feelings had impressed upon my nervous sensibilities
a character of irritation--agitation--restlessness--eternal
self-dissatisfaction--which were gradually gathering into a distinct,
well-defined type, that would, but for youth--almighty youth, and
the spirit of youth--have shaped itself into some nervous complaint,
wearing symptoms _sui generis_ (for most nervous complaints, in minds
that are at all eccentric, will be _sui generis_); and, perhaps,
finally, have been immortalized in some medical journal as the
anomalous malady of an interesting young gentleman, aged twenty-two,
who was supposed to have studied too severely, and to have perplexed
his brain with German metaphysics. To this result things tended;
but, in one hour, all passed away. It was gone, never to return. The
spiritual being whom I had anticipated--for, like Eloisa,

     "My fancy framed him of the angelic kind,
     Some emanation of the all-beauteous mind"--

this ideal creature had at length been seen--seen "in the flesh"--seen
with fleshly eyes; and now, though he did not cease for years to wear
something of the glory and the _aureola_ which, in Popish legends,
invests the head of superhuman beings, yet it was no longer as a being
to be feared: it was as Raphael, the "affable" angel, who conversed on
the terms of man with man, that I now regarded him.

It was four o'clock, perhaps, when we arrived. At that hour in November
the daylight soon declined; and, in an hour and a half, we were all
collected about the tea-table. This, with the Wordsworths, under the
simple rustic system of habits which they cherished then, and for
twenty years after, was the most delightful meal in the day; just as
dinner is in great cities, and for the same reason--because it was
prolonged into a meal of leisure and conversation. And the reason why
any meal favours and encourages conversation is pretty much the same
as that which accounts for the breaking down of so many lawyers, and
generally their ill-success in the House of Commons. In the courts
of law, when a man is haranguing upon general and abstract topics,
if at any moment he feels getting beyond his depth, if he finds his
anchor driving, he can always bring up, and drop his anchor anew upon
the _terra firma_ of his case: the facts of this, as furnished by his
brief, always assure him of a retreat as soon as he finds his more
general thoughts failing him; and the consciousness of this retreat, by
inspiring confidence, makes it much less probable that they _should_
fail. But, in Parliament, where the advantage of a case with given
facts and circumstances, or the details of a statistical report, does
not offer itself once in a dozen times that a member has occasion to
speak--where he has to seek unpremeditated arguments and reasonings of
a general nature, from the impossibility of wholly evading the previous
speeches that may have made an impression upon the House;--this
necessity, at any rate a trying one to most people, is doubly so to
one who has always walked in the leading-strings of a _case_--always
swum with the help of bladders, in the conscious resource of his
_facts_. The reason, therefore, why a lawyer succeeds ill as a senator
is to be found in the sudden removal of an artificial aid. Now, just
such an artificial aid is furnished to timid or to unready men by
a dinner-table, and the miscellaneous attentions, courtesies, or
occupations which it enjoins or permits, as by the fixed memoranda
of a brief. If a man finds the ground slipping from beneath him in a
discussion--if, in a tide of illustration, he suddenly comes to a pause
for want of matter--he can make a graceful close, a self-interruption,
that shall wear the interpretation of forbearance, or even win the
rhetorical credit of an _aposiopesis_ (according to circumstances), by
stopping to perform a duty of the occasion: pressed into a dilemma by
some political partisan, one may evade it by pressing him to take a
little of the dish before one; or, plagued for a reason which is not
forthcoming, one may deprecate this logical rigour by inviting one's
tormentor to wine. In short, what I mean to say is, that a dinner
party, or any meal which is made the meal for intellectual relaxation,
must for ever offer the advantages of a _palæstra_ in which the weapons
are foils and the wounds not mortal: in which, whilst the interest is
that of a real, the danger is that of a sham fight: in which whilst
there is always an opportunity for swimming into deep waters, there is
always a retreat into shallow ones. And it may be laid down as a maxim,
that no nation is civilized to the height of its capacity until it
_has_ one such meal. With our ancestors of sixty years back, this meal
was supper: with the Athenians and Greeks it was dinner[128] (coena
and [Greek: deipnon]), as with ourselves; only that the hour was a
very early one, in consequence, partly, of the early bedtime of these
nations (which again was occasioned by the dearness of candle-light
to the mass of those who had political rights, on whose account the
forensic meetings, the visits of clients to their patrons, &c., opened
the political day by four hours earlier than with us), and partly in
consequence of the uncommercial habits of the ancients--commerce having
at no time created an aristocracy of its own, and, therefore, having at
no time and in no city (no, not Alexandria nor Carthage) dictated the
household and social arrangements, or the distribution of its hours.

I have been led insensibly into this digression. I now resume the
thread of my narrative. That night, after hearing conversation superior
by much, in its tone and subject, to any which I had ever heard
before--one exception only being made in favour of Coleridge, whose
style differed from Wordsworth's in this, that, being far more agile
and more comprehensive, consequently more showy and surprising, it was
less impressive and weighty; for Wordsworth's was slow in its movement,
solemn, majestic. After a luxury so rare as this, I found myself, about
eleven at night, in a pretty bedroom, about fourteen feet by twelve.
Much I feared that this might turn out the best room in the house; and
it illustrates the hospitality of my new friends to mention that it
was. Early in the morning, I was awoke by a little voice, issuing from
a little cottage bed in an opposite corner, soliloquizing in a low
tone. I soon recognized the words--"Suffered under Pontius Pilate; was
crucified, dead, and buried"; and the voice I easily conjectured to be
that of the eldest amongst Wordsworth's children, a son, and at that
time about three years old. He was a remarkably fine boy in strength
and size, promising (which has in fact been realized) a much more
powerful person, physically, than that of his father. Miss Wordsworth
I found making breakfast in the little sitting-room. No urn was there;
no glittering breakfast service; a kettle boiled upon the fire, and
everything was in harmony with these unpretending arrangements. I, the
son of a merchant, and naturally, therefore, in the midst of luxurious
(though not ostentatious) display from my childhood, had never seen so
humble a _ménage_: and, contrasting the dignity of the man with this
honourable poverty, and this courageous avowal of it, his utter absence
of all effort to disguise the simple truth of the case, I felt my
admiration increase to the uttermost by all I saw. This, thought I to
myself, is, indeed, in his own words--

     "Plain living, and high thinking."

This is indeed to reserve the humility and the parsimonies of life
for its bodily enjoyments, and to apply its lavishness and its luxury
to its enjoyments of the intellect. So might Milton have lived; so
Marvell. Throughout the day--which was rainy--the same style of modest
hospitality prevailed. Wordsworth and his sister--myself being of the
party--walked out in spite of the rain, and made the circuit of the two
lakes, Grasmere and its dependency Rydal--a walk of about six miles. On
the third day, Mrs. Coleridge having now pursued her journey northward
to Keswick, and having, at her departure, invited me, in her own name
as well as Southey's, to come and see them, Wordsworth proposed that we
should go thither in company, but not by the direct route--a distance
of only thirteen miles: this we were to take in our road homeward; our
outward-bound journey was to be by way of Ulleswater--a circuit of
forty-three miles.

On the third morning after my arrival in Grasmere, I found the whole
family, except the two children, prepared for the expedition across the
mountains. I had heard of no horses, and took it for granted that we
were to walk; however, at the moment of starting, a cart--the common
farmers' cart of the country--made its appearance; and the driver
was a bonny young woman of the vale. Such a vehicle I had never in
my life seen used for such a purpose; but what was good enough for
the Wordsworths was good enough for me; and, accordingly, we were all
carted along to the little town, or large village, of Ambleside--three
and a half miles distant. Our style of travelling occasioned no
astonishment; on the contrary, we met a smiling salutation wherever
we appeared--Miss Wordsworth being, as I observed, the person most
familiarly known of our party, and the one who took upon herself the
whole expenses of the flying colloquies exchanged with stragglers on
the road. What struck me with most astonishment, however, was the
liberal manner of our fair driver, who made no scruple of taking a
leap, with the reins in her hand, and seating herself dexterously upon
the shafts (or, in Westmoreland phrase, the _trams_) of the cart. From
Ambleside--and without one foot of intervening flat ground--begins
to rise the famous ascent of Kirkstone; after which, for three long
miles, all riding in a cart drawn by one horse becomes impossible. The
ascent is computed at three miles, but is, probably, a little more.
In some parts it is almost frightfully steep; for the road, being
only the original mountain track of shepherds, gradually widened and
improved from age to age (especially since the era of tourists began),
is carried over ground which no engineer, even in alpine countries,
would have viewed as practicable. In ascending, this is felt chiefly
as an obstruction and not as a peril, unless where there is a risk of
the horses backing; but in the reverse order, some of these precipitous
descents are terrific: and yet once, in utter darkness, after midnight,
and the darkness irradiated only by continual streams of lightning,
I was driven down this whole descent, at a full gallop, by a young
woman--the carriage being a light one, the horses frightened, and
the descents, at some critical parts of the road, so literally like
the sides of a house, that it was difficult to keep the fore wheels
from pressing upon the hind legs of the horses. Indeed, this is only
according to the custom of the country, as I have before mentioned.
The innkeeper of Ambleside, or Lowwood, will not mount this formidable
hill without four horses. The leaders you are not required to take
beyond the first three miles; but, of course, they are glad if you will
take them on the whole stage of nine miles, to Patterdale; and, in
that case, there is a real luxury at hand for those who enjoy velocity
of motion. The descent into Patterdale is much above two miles; but
such is the propensity for flying down hills in Westmoreland that I
have found the descent accomplished in about six minutes, which is at
the rate of eighteen miles an hour; the various turnings of the road
making the speed much more sensible to the traveller. The pass, at the
summit of this ascent, is nothing to be compared in sublimity with
the pass under Great Gavil from Wastdalehead; but it is solemn, and
profoundly impressive. At a height so awful as this, it may be easily
supposed that all human dwellings have been long left behind: no sound
of human life, no bells of churches or chapels ever ascend so far.
And, as is noticed in Wordsworth's fine stanzas upon this memorable
pass, the only sound that, even in noonday, disturbs the sleep of the
weary pedestrian, is that of the bee murmuring amongst the mountain
flowers--a sound as ancient

     "As man's imperial front, and woman's roseate bloom."

This way, and (which, to the sentiment of the case, is an important
point) this way of _necessity_ and _inevitably_, passed the Roman
legions; for it is a mathematic impossibility that any other route
could be found for an army nearer to the eastward of this pass than
by way of Kendal and Shap; nearer to the westward, than by way of
Legbesthwaite and St. John's Vale (and so by Threlkeld to Penrith).
Now, these two roads are exactly twenty-five miles apart; and, since
a Roman cohort was stationed at Ambleside (_Amboglane_), it is pretty
evident that this cohort would not correspond with the more northerly
stations by either of these remote routes--having immediately before
it this direct though difficult pass to Kirkstone. On the solitary
area of tableland which you find at the summit--though, Heaven knows,
you might almost cover it with a drawing-room carpet, so suddenly
does the mountain take to its old trick of precipitous descent, on
both sides alike--there are only two objects to remind you of man
and his workmanship. One is a guide-post--always a picturesque and
interesting object, because it expresses a wild country and a labyrinth
of roads, and often made much more interesting (as in this case) by
the lichens which cover it, and which record the generations of men
to whom it has done its office; as also by the crucifix form, which
inevitably recalls, in all mountainous regions, the crosses of Catholic
lands, raised to the memory of wayfaring men who have perished by
the hand of the assassin. The other memorial of man is even more
interesting:--Amongst the fragments of rock which lie in the confusion
of a ruin on each side of the road, one there is which exceeds the
rest in height, and which, in shape, presents a very close resemblance
to a church. This lies to the left of the road as you are going from
Ambleside; and from its name, Churchstone (Kirkstone), is derived
the name of the pass, and from the pass the name of the mountain.
The guide-post--which was really the work of man--tells those going
southwards (for to those who go northwards it is useless, since, in
that direction, there is no choice of roads) that the left hand track
conducts you to Troutbeck, and Bowness, and Kendal, the right hand to
Ambleside, and Hawkshead, and Ulverstone. The church--which is but a
phantom of man's handiwork--might, however, really be mistaken for
such, were it not that the rude and almost inaccessible state of the
adjacent ground proclaims the truth. As to size, _that_ is remarkably
difficult to estimate upon wild heaths or mountain solitudes, where
there are no leadings through gradations of distance, nor any
artificial standards, from which height or breadth can be properly
deduced. This mimic church, however, has a peculiarly fine effect in
this wild situation, which leaves so far below the tumults of this
world: the phantom church, by suggesting the phantom and evanescent
image of a congregation, where never congregation met; of the pealing
organ, where never sound was heard except of wild natural notes, or
else of the wind rushing through these mighty gates of everlasting
rock--in this way, the fanciful image that accompanies the traveller on
his road, for half a mile or more, serves to bring out the antagonist
feeling of intense and awful solitude, which is the natural and
presiding sentiment--the _religio loci_--that broods for ever over the
romantic pass.

Having walked up Kirkstone, we ascended our cart again; then rapidly
descended to Brothers' Water--a lake which lies immediately below;
and, about three miles further, through endless woods and under the
shade of mighty fells, immediate dependencies and processes of the
still more mighty Helvellyn, we approached the vale of Patterdale,
when, by moonlight, we reached the inn. Here we found horses--by whom
furnished I never asked nor heard; perhaps I owe somebody for a horse
to this day. All I remember is--that through those most romantic woods
and rocks of Stybarren--through those silent glens of Glencoin and
Glenridding--through that most romantic of parks then belonging to
the Duke of Norfolk, viz. Gobarrow Park--we saw alternately, for four
miles, the most grotesque and the most awful spectacles--

               "Abbey windows
     And Moorish temples of the Hindoos,"

all fantastic, all as unreal and shadowy as the moonlight which created
them; whilst, at every angle of the road, broad gleams came upwards of
Ulleswater, stretching for nine miles northward, but, fortunately for
its effect, broken into three watery chambers of almost equal length,
and rarely visible at once. At the foot of the lake, in a house called
Ewsmere, we passed the night, having accomplished about twenty-two
miles only in our day's walking and riding.

The next day Wordsworth and I, leaving at Ewsmere the rest of our
party, spent the morning in roaming through the woods of Lowther, and,
towards evening, we dined together at Emont Bridge, one mile short of
Penrith. Afterwards, we walked into Penrith. There Wordsworth left me
in excellent quarters--the house of Captain Wordsworth, from which the
family happened to be absent. Whither he himself adjourned, I know
not, nor on what business; however, it occupied him throughout the
next day; and, therefore, I employed myself in sauntering along the
road, about seventeen miles, to Keswick. There I had been directed to
ask for Greta Hall, which, with some little difficulty, I found; for
it stands out of the town a few hundred yards, upon a little eminence
overhanging the river Greta. It was about seven o'clock when I reached
Southey's door; for I had stopped to dine at a little public house in
Threlkeld, and had walked slowly for the last two hours in the dark.
The arrival of a stranger occasioned a little sensation in the house;
and, by the time the front door could be opened, I saw Mrs. Coleridge,
and a gentleman whom I could not doubt to be Southey, standing, very
hospitably, to greet my entrance. Southey was, in person, somewhat
taller than Wordsworth, being about five feet eleven in height, or a
trifle more, whilst Wordsworth was about five feet ten; and, partly
from having slender limbs, partly from being more symmetrically formed
about the shoulders than Wordsworth, he struck one as a better and
lighter figure, to the effect of which his dress contributed; for he
wore pretty constantly a short jacket and pantaloons, and had much the
air of a Tyrolese mountaineer.

On the next day arrived Wordsworth. I could read at once, in the manner
of the two authors, that they were not on particularly friendly,
or rather, I should say, confidential terms. It seemed to me as if
both had silently said--"We are too much men of sense to quarrel
because we do not happen particularly to like each other's writings:
we are neighbours, or what passes for such in the country. Let us
show each other the courtesies which are becoming to men of letters;
and, for any closer connexion, our distance of thirteen miles may
be always sufficient to keep us from _that_." In after life, it is
true--fifteen years, perhaps, from this time--many circumstances
combined to bring Southey and Wordsworth into more intimate terms
of friendship: agreement in politics, sorrows which had happened to
both alike in their domestic relations, and the sort of tolerance for
different opinions in literature, or, indeed, in anything else, which
advancing years and experience are sure to bring with them. But at
this period, Southey and Wordsworth entertained a mutual esteem, but
did not cordially like each other. Indeed, it would have been odd if
they had. Wordsworth lived in the open air: Southey in his library,
which Coleridge used to call his wife. Southey had particularly
elegant habits (Wordsworth called them finical) in the use of books.
Wordsworth, on the other hand, was so negligent, and so self-indulgent
in the same case, that, as Southey, laughing, expressed it to me some
years afterwards, when I was staying at Greta Hall on a visit--"To
introduce Wordsworth into one's library is like letting a bear into
a tulip garden." What I mean by self-indulgent is this: generally it
happens that new books baffle and mock one's curiosity by their uncut
leaves; and the trial is pretty much the same as when, in some town
where you are utterly unknown, you meet the postman at a distance from
your inn, with some letter for yourself from a dear, dear friend in
foreign regions, without money to pay the postage. How is it with you,
dear reader, in such a case? Are you not tempted (_I am_ grievously) to
snatch the letter from his tantalizing hand, spite of the roar which
you anticipate of "Stop thief!" and make off as fast as you can for
some solitary street in the suburbs, where you may instantly effect an
entrance upon your new estate before the purchase money is paid down?
Such were Wordsworth's feelings in regard to new books; of which the
first exemplification I had was early in my acquaintance with him, and
on occasion of a book which (if any could) justified the too summary
style of his advances in rifling its charms. On a level with the eye,
when sitting at the tea-table in my little cottage at Grasmere, stood
the collective works of Edmund Burke. The book was to me an eye-sore
and an ear-sore for many a year, in consequence of the cacophonous
title lettered by the bookseller upon the back--"Burke's Works." I have
heard it said, by the way, that Donne's intolerable defect of ear grew
out of his own baptismal name, when harnessed to his own surname--_John
Donne_. No man, it was said, who had listened to this hideous jingle
from childish years, could fail to have his genius for discord, and the
abominable in sound, improved to the utmost. Not less dreadful than
_John Donne_ was "Burke's Works"; which, however, on the old principle,
that every day's work is no day's work, continued to annoy me for
twenty-one years. Wordsworth took down the volume; unfortunately it was
uncut; fortunately, and by a special Providence as to him, it seemed,
tea was proceeding at the time. Dry toast required butter; butter
required knives; and knives then lay on the table; but sad it was for
the virgin purity of Mr. Burke's as yet unsunned pages, that every
knife bore upon its blade testimonies of the service it had rendered.
Did _that_ stop Wordsworth? Did that cause him to call for another
knife? Not at all; he

     "Look'd at the knife that caus'd his pain:
     And look'd and sigh'd, and look'd and sigh'd again";

and then, after this momentary tribute to regret, he tore his way into
the heart of the volume with this knife, that left its greasy honours
behind it upon every page: and are they not there to this day? This
personal experience first brought me acquainted with Wordsworth's
habits in that particular especially, with his intense impatience for
one minute's delay which would have brought a remedy; and yet the
reader may believe that it is no affectation in me to say that fifty
such cases could have given me but little pain, when I explain that
whatever could be made good by money, at that time, I did not regard.
Had the book been an old black-letter book, having a value from its
rarity, I should have been disturbed in an indescribable degree; but
simply with reference to the utter impossibility of reproducing that
mode of value. As to the Burke, it was a common book; I had bought the
book, with many others, at the sale of Sir Cecil Wray's library, for
about two-thirds of the selling price: I could easily replace it; and I
mention the case at all, only to illustrate the excess of Wordsworth's
outrages on books, which made him, in Southey's eyes, a mere monster;
for Southey's beautiful library was his estate; and this difference of
habits would alone have sufficed to alienate him from Wordsworth. And
so I argued in other cases of the same nature. Meantime, had Wordsworth
done as Coleridge did, how cheerfully should I have acquiesced in his
destruction (such as it was, in a pecuniary sense) of books, as the
very highest obligation he could confer. Coleridge often spoiled a
book; but, in the course of doing this, he enriched that book with
so many and so valuable notes, tossing about him, with such lavish
profusion, from such a cornucopia of discursive reading, and such a
fusing intellect, commentaries so many-angled and so many-coloured
that I have envied many a man whose luck has placed him in the way of
such injuries; and that man must have been a churl (though, God knows!
too often this churl _has_ existed) who could have found in his heart
to complain. But Wordsworth rarely, indeed, wrote on the margin of
books; and, when he did, nothing could less illustrate his intellectual
superiority. The comments were such as might have been made by anybody.
Once, I remember, before I had ever seen Wordsworth--probably a year
before--I met a person who had once enjoyed the signal honour of
travelling with him to London. It was in a stage-coach. But the person
in question well knew _who_ it was that had been his _compagnon de
voyage_. Immediately he was glorified in my eyes. "And," said I, to
this glorified gentleman (who, _par parenthése_, was also a donkey),
"Now, as you travelled nearly three hundred miles in the company of
Mr. Wordsworth, consequently (for this was in 1805) during two nights
and two days, doubtless you must have heard many profound remarks that
would inevitably fall from his lips." Nay, Coleridge had also been of
the party; and, if Wordsworth _solus_ could have been dull, was it
within human possibilities that these _gemini_ should have been so?
"Was it possible?" I said; and perhaps my donkey, who looked like one
that had been immoderately threatened, at last took courage; his eye
brightened; and he intimated that he _did_ remember something that
Wordsworth had said--an "observe," as the Scotch call it.

"Ay, indeed; and what was it now? What did the great man say?"

"Why, sir, in fact, and to make a long story short, on coming near
to London, we breakfasted at Baldock--you know Baldock? It's in
Hertfordshire. Well, now, sir, would you believe it, though we were
quite in regular time, the breakfast was precisely good for nothing?"

"And Wordsworth?"

"He observed----"

"What did he observe?"

"That the buttered toast looked, for all the world, as if it had been
soaked in hot water."

Ye heavens! "_buttered toast!_" And was it _this_ I waited for? Now,
thought I, had Henry Mackenzie been breakfasting with Wordsworth at
Baldock (and, strange enough! in years to come I _did_ breakfast
with Henry Mackenzie, for the solitary time I ever met him, and at
Wordsworth's house in Rydal), he would have carried off one sole
reminiscence from the meeting--namely, a confirmation of his creed,
that we English are all dedicated, from our very cradle, to the
luxuries of the palate, and peculiarly to this.[129] _Proh pudor!_
Yet, in sad sincerity, Wordsworth's pencil-notices in books were quite
as disappointing. In "Roderick Random," for example, I found a note
upon a certain luscious description, to the effect that "such things
should be left to the imagination of the reader--not expressed." In
another place, that it was "improper"; and, in a third, that "the
principle laid down was doubtful," or, as Sir Roger de Coverley
observes, "that much might be said on both sides." All this, however,
indicates nothing more than that different men require to be roused
by different stimulants. Wordsworth, in his marginal notes, thought
of nothing but delivering himself of a strong feeling, with which
he wished to challenge the reader's sympathy. Coleridge imagined an
audience before him; and, however doubtful that consummation might
seem, I am satisfied that he never wrote a line for which he did
not feel the momentary inspiration of sympathy and applause, under
the confidence, that, sooner or later, all which he had committed
to the chance margins of books would converge and assemble in some
common reservoir of reception. Bread scattered upon the water will
be gathered after many days. This, perhaps, was the consolation that
supported him; and the prospect that, for a time, his Arethusa of
truth would flow underground, did not, perhaps, disturb, but rather
cheered and elevated, the sublime old somnambulist.[130] Meantime,
Wordsworth's habits of using books--which, I am satisfied, would, in
those days, alone have kept him at a distance from most men with fine
libraries--were not vulgar; not the habits of those who turn over the
page by means of a wet finger (though even this abomination I have
seen perpetrated by a Cambridge tutor and fellow of a college; but
then he had been bred up as a ploughman, and the son of a ploughman):
no; but his habits were more properly barbarous and licentious, and in
the spirit of audacity belonging _de jure_ to no man but him who could
plead an income of four or five hundred thousand per annum, and to whom
the Bodleian or the Vatican would be a three years' purchase. Gross,
meantime, was his delusion upon this subject. Himself he regarded as
the golden mean between the too little and the too much of care for
books; and, as it happened that every one of his friends far exceeded
him in this point, curiously felicitous was the explanation which he
gave of this superfluous care, so as to bring it within the natural
operation of some known fact in the man's peculiar situation. Southey
(he was by nature something of an old bachelor) had his house filled
with pretty articles--_bijouterie_, and so forth; and, naturally,
he wished his books to be kept up to the same level--burnished
and bright for show. Sir George Beaumont--this peculiarly elegant
and accomplished man--was an old and most affectionate friend of
Wordsworth's. Sir George Beaumont never had any children; if he had
been so blessed, they, by familiarizing him with the spectacle of
books ill used--stained, torn, mutilated, &c.--would have lowered the
standard of his requisitions. The short solution of the whole case
was--and it illustrated the nature of his education--he had never lived
in a regular family at a time when habits are moulded. From boyhood to
manhood he had been _sui juris_.

Returning to Southey and Greta Hall, both the house and the master
may deserve a few words more of description. For the master, I have
already sketched his person; and his face I profess myself unable to
describe accurately. His hair was black, and yet his complexion was
fair; his eyes I believe to be hazel and large; but I will not vouch
for that fact: his nose aquiline; and he has a remarkable habit of
looking up into the air, as if looking at abstractions. The expression
of his face was that of a very acute and aspiring man. So far, it was
even noble, as it conveyed a feeling of a serene and gentle pride,
habitually familiar with elevating subjects of contemplation. And yet
it was impossible that this pride could have been offensive to anybody,
chastened as it was by the most unaffected modesty; and this modesty
made evident and prominent by the constant expression of reverence for
the great men of the age (when he happened to esteem them such), and
for all the great patriarchs of our literature. The point in which
Southey's manner failed the most in conciliating regard was in all
which related to the external expressions of friendliness. No man could
be more sincerely hospitable--no man more essentially disposed to give
up even his time (the possession which he most valued) to the service
of his friends. But there was an air of reserve and distance about
him--the reserve of a lofty, self-respecting mind, but, perhaps, a
little too freezing--in his treatment of all persons who were not among
the _corps_ of his ancient fireside friends. Still, even towards the
veriest strangers, it is but justice to notice his extreme courtesy in
sacrificing his literary employments for the day, whatever they might
be, to the duty (for such he made it) of doing the honours of the lake
and the adjacent mountains.

Southey was at that time (1807), and has continued ever since, the most
industrious of all literary men on record. A certain task he prescribed
to himself every morning before breakfast. This could not be a very
long one, for he breakfasted at nine, or soon after, and _never_ rose
before eight, though he went to bed duly at half-past ten; but, as I
have many times heard him say, less than nine hours' sleep he found
insufficient. From breakfast to a latish dinner (about half after five
or six) was his main period of literary toil. After dinner, according
to the accident of having or not having visitors in the house, he sat
over his wine, or he retired to his library again, from which, about
eight, he was summoned to tea. But, generally speaking, he closed his
_literary_ toils at dinner; the whole of the hours after that meal
being dedicated to his correspondence. This, it may be supposed, was
unusually large, to occupy so much of his time, for his letters rarely
extended to any length. At that period, the post, by way of Penrith,
reached Keswick about six or seven in the evening. And so pointedly
regular was Southey in all his habits that, short as the time was,
all letters were answered on the same evening which brought them. At
tea, he read the London papers. It was perfectly astonishing to men of
less methodical habits to find how much he got through of elaborate
business by his unvarying system of arrangement in the distribution
of his time. We often hear it said, in accounts of pattern ladies and
gentlemen (what Coleridge used contemptuously to style _goody_ people),
that they found time for everything; that business never interrupted
pleasure; that labours of love and charity never stood in the way
of courtesy and personal enjoyment. This is easy to say--easy to put
down as one feature of an imaginary portrait: but I must say that in
actual life I have seen few such cases. Southey, however, _did_ find
time for everything. It moved the sneers of some people, that even his
poetry was composed according to a predetermined rule; that so many
lines should be produced, by contract, as it were, before breakfast;
so many at such another definite interval. And I acknowledge that so
far I went along with the sneerers as to marvel exceedingly how that
_could_ be possible. But, if _a priori_ one laughed and expected to
see verses corresponding to this mechanic rule of construction, _a
posteriori_ one was bound to judge of the verses as one found them.
Supposing them good, they were entitled to honour, no matter for the
previous reasons which made it possible that they would _not_ be good.
And generally, however undoubtedly they _ought_ to have been bad, the
world has pronounced them good. In fact, they _are_ good; and the sole
objection to them is, that they are too intensely _objective_--too much
reflect the mind, as spreading itself out upon external things--too
little exhibit the mind as introverting itself upon its own thoughts
and feelings. This, however, is an objection which only seems to limit
the range of the poetry--and all poetry _is_ limited in its range: none
comprehends more than a section of the human power.

Meantime, the prose of Southey was that by which he lived. The
_Quarterly Review_ it was by which, as he expressed it to myself in
1810, he "_made the pot boil_."[131] About the same time, possibly
as early as 1808 (for I think that I remember in that Journal an
account of the Battle of Vimiera), Southey was engaged by an Edinburgh
publisher (Constable, was it not?) to write the entire historical part
of the _Edinburgh Annual Register_, at a salary of £400 per annum.
Afterwards, the publisher, who was intensely national, and, doubtless,
never from the first cordially relished the notion of importing
English aid into a city teeming with briefless barristers and variety
of talent, threw out a hint that perhaps he might reduce the salary
to £300. Just about this time I happened to see Southey, who said
laughingly--"If the man of Edinburgh does this, I shall _strike_ for an
advance of wages." I presume that he _did_ strike, and, like many other
"operatives," without effect. Those who work for lower wages during a
strike are called _snobs_,[132] the men who stand out being _nobs_.
Southey became a resolute nob; but some snob was found in Edinburgh,
some youthful advocate, who accepted £300 per annum, and thenceforward
Southey lost this part of his income. I once possessed the whole work:
and in one part, viz. the _Domestic Chronicle_, I know that it is
executed with a most culpable carelessness--the beginnings of cases
being given without the ends, the ends without the beginnings--a defect
but too common in public journals. The credit of the work, however,
was staked upon its treatment of the current public history of Europe,
and the tone of its politics in times so full of agitation, and
teeming with new births in every year, some fated to prove abortive,
but others bearing golden promises for the human race. Now, whatever
might be the talent with which Southey's successor performed his duty,
there was a loss in one point for which no talent of mere execution
could make amends. The very prejudices of Southey tended to unity of
feeling: they were in harmony with each other, and grew out of a strong
moral feeling, which is the one sole secret for giving interest to an
historical narration, fusing the incoherent details into one body, and
carrying the reader fluently along the else monotonous recurrences and
unmeaning details of military movements.

Well or ill directed, a strong moral feeling, and a profound sympathy
with elementary justice, is that which creates a soul under what
else may well be denominated, Miltonically, "the ribs of death." Now
this, and a mind already made up even to obstinacy upon all public
questions, were the peculiar qualifications which Southey brought to
the task--qualifications not to be bought in any market, not to be
compensated by any amount of mere intellectual talent, and almost
impossible as the qualifications of a much younger man.[133]

As a pecuniary loss, though considerable, Southey was not unable to
support it; for he had a pension from Government before this time, and
under the following circumstances:--Charles Wynne, the brother of Sir
Watkin, the great autocrat of North Wales--that C. W. who is almost
equally well known for his knowledge of Parliamentary usage, which
pointed him out to the notice of the House as an eligible person to
fill the office of Speaker, and for his unfortunately shrill voice,
which chiefly it was that defeated his claim[134]--(in fact, as is
universally known, his brother and he, for different defects of
voice and utterance, are called _Bubble and Squeak_)--this C. W. had
believed himself to have been deeply indebted to Southey's high-toned
moral example, and to his wise counsels, during the time when both
were students at Oxford, for the fortunate direction given to his own
wavering impulses. This sense of obligation he endeavoured to express
by settling a pension upon Southey from his own funds. At length, upon
the death of Mr. Pitt, early in 1806, an opening was made for the Fox
and Grenville parties to come into office. Charles Wynne, as a person
connected by marriage with the house of Grenville, and united with them
in political opinions, shared in the golden shower; he also received a
place; and, upon the strength of his improving prospects, he married:
upon which it occurred to Southey, that it was no longer right to tax
the funds of one who was now called upon to support an establishment
becoming his rank. Under that impression he threw up his pension; and
upon _their_ part, to express their sense of what they considered a
delicate and honourable sacrifice, the Grenvilles placed Southey upon
the national pension list.

What might be the exact colour of Southey's political creed in this
year, 1807, it is difficult to say. The great revolution, in his way of
thinking upon such subjects, with which he has been so often upbraided
as something equal in delinquency to a deliberate tergiversation or
moral apostasy, could not have then taken place; and of this I am sure,
from the following little anecdote connected with this visit:--On the
day after my own arrival at Greta Hall, came Wordsworth following
upon my steps from Penrith. We dined and passed that evening with Mr.
Southey. The next morning, after breakfast, previously to leaving
Keswick, we were sitting in Southey's library; and he was discussing
with Wordsworth the aspect of public affairs: for my part, I was far
too diffident to take any part in such a conversation, for I had no
opinions at all upon politics, nor any interest in public affairs,
further than that I had a keen sympathy with the national honour,
gloried in the name of Englishman, and had been bred up in a frenzied
horror of jacobinism. Not having been old enough, at the first outbreak
of the French Revolution, to participate (as else, undoubtedly, I
should have done) in the golden hopes of its early dawn, my first
youthful introduction to foreign politics had been in seasons and
circumstances that taught me to approve of all I heard in abhorrence of
French excesses, and to worship the name of Pitt; otherwise my whole
heart had been so steadily fixed on a different world from the world of
our daily experience, that, for some years, I had never looked into a
newspaper; nor, if I cared something for the movement made by nations
from year to year, did I care one iota for their movement from week
to week. Still, careless as I was on these subjects, it sounded as a
novelty to me, and one which I had not dreamed of as a possibility,
to hear men of education and liberal pursuits--men, besides, whom I
regarded as so elevated in mind, and one of them as a person charmed
and consecrated from error--giving utterance to sentiments which seemed
absolutely disloyal. Yet now did I hear--and I heard with an emotion of
sorrow, but a sorrow that instantly gave way to a conviction that it
was myself who lay under a delusion, and simply because

opinions avowed most hostile to the reigning family; not personally
to them, but generally to a monarchical form of government. And that
I could not be mistaken in my impression, that my memory cannot have
played me false, is evident, from one relic of the conversation which
rested upon my ear, and has survived to this day [1839]--thirty and
two years from the time. It had been agreed, that no good was to be
hoped for, as respected England, until the royal family should be
expatriated; and Southey, jestingly considering to what country they
could be exiled, with mutual benefit for that country and themselves,
had supposed the case--that, with a large allowance of money, such as
might stimulate beneficially the industry of a rising colony, they
should be transported to New South Wales; which project, amusing his
fancy, he had, with the readiness and facility that characterizes his
mind, thrown _extempore_ into verse; speaking off, as an improvisatore,
about eight or ten lines, of which the three last I perfectly remember,
and they were these (by the way I should have mentioned that they took
the form of a petition addressed to the King):--

    "Therefore, old George, by George we pray
    Of thee forthwith to extend thy sway
    Over the great Botanic Bay."

The sole doubt I have about the exact words regards the second line,
which might have been (according to a various reading which equally
clings to my ear)--

    "That thou would'st please to extend thy sway."

But about the last I cannot be wrong; for I remember laughing with a
sense of something peculiarly droll in the substitution of the stilted
phrase--"_the great Botanic Bay_," for our ordinary week-day name
_Botany Bay_, so redolent of thieves and pickpockets.

Southey walked with us that morning for about five miles on our road
towards Grasmere, which brought us to the southern side of Shoulthwaite
Moss, and into the sweet solitary little vale of Legbesthwaite. And,
by the way, he took leave of us at the gate of a house, one amongst
the very few (five or six in all) just serving to redeem that valley
from absolute solitude, which some years afterwards became, in a
slight degree, remarkable to me from two little incidents by which
it connected itself with my personal experiences. One was, perhaps,
scarcely worth recording. It was simply this--that Wordsworth and
myself having, through a long day's rambling, alternately walked and
rode with a friend of his who happened to have a travelling carriage
with him, and who was on his way to Keswick, agreed to wait hereabouts
until Wordsworth's friend, in his abundant kindness, should send back
his carriage to take us, on our return to Grasmere, distant about
eight miles. It was a lovely summer evening; but, as it happened that
we ate our breakfast early, and had eaten nothing at all throughout a
long summer's day, we agreed to "sorn" upon the goodman of the house,
whoever he might happen to be, Catholic or Protestant, Jew, Gentile,
or Mahometan, and to take any bone that he would be pleased to toss to
such hungry dogs as ourselves. Accordingly we repaired to his gate;
we knocked, and, forthwith it was opened to us by a man-mountain,
who listened benignantly to our humble request, and ushered us into
a comfortable parlour. All sorts of refreshments he continued to
shower upon us for a space of two hours: it became evident that our
introducer was the master of the house: we adored him in our thoughts
as an earthly providence to hungry wayfarers; and we longed to make his
acquaintance. But, for some inexplicable reason, that must continue
to puzzle all future commentators on Wordsworth and his history, he
never made his appearance. Could it be, we thought, that, without the
formality of a sign, he, in so solitary a region, more than twentyfive
miles distant from Kendal (the only town worthy of the name throughout
the adjacent country), exercised the functions of a landlord, and that
we ought to pay him for his most liberal hospitality? Never was such
a dilemma from the foundation of Legbesthwaite. To err, in either
direction, was damnable: to go off without paying, if he _were_ an
innkeeper, made us swindlers; to offer payment if he were not, and
supposing that he had been inundating us with his hospitable bounties
simply in the character of a natural-born gentleman, made us the most
unfeeling of mercenary ruffians. In the latter case we might expect a
duel; in the former, of course, the treadmill. We were deliberating
on this sad alternative, and I, for my part was voting in favour of
the treadmill, when the sound of wheels was heard, and, in one minute,
the carriage of his friend drew up to the farmer's gate; the crisis
had now arrived, and we perspired considerably; when in came the frank
Cumberland lass who had been our attendant. To her we propounded our
difficulty--and lucky it was we did so, for she assured us that her
master was an awful man, and would have "brained" us both if we had
insulted him with the offer of money. She, however, honoured us by
accepting the price of some female ornament.

I made a memorandum at the time, to ascertain the peculiar taste of
this worthy Cumberland farmer, in order that I might, at some future
opportunity, express my thanks to him for his courtesy; but, alas! for
human resolutions, I have not done so to this moment; and is it likely
that he, perhaps sixty years old at that time (1813), is alive at
present, twenty-five years removed? Well, he _may_ be; though I think
_that_ exceedingly doubtful, considering the next anecdote relating to
the same house:--Two, or, it may be, three years after this time, I
was walking to Keswick, from my own cottage in Grasmere. The distance
was thirteen miles; the time just nine o'clock; the night a cloudy
moonlight, and intensely cold. I took the very greatest delight in
these nocturnal walks through the silent valleys of Cumberland and
Westmoreland; and often at hours far later than the present. What I
liked in this solitary rambling was, to trace the course of the evening
through its household hieroglyphics from the windows which I passed or
saw: to see the blazing fires shining through the windows of houses,
lurking in nooks far apart from neighbours; sometimes, in solitudes
that seemed abandoned to the owl, to catch the sounds of household
mirth; then, some miles further, to perceive the time of going to bed;
then the gradual sinking to silence of the house; then the drowsy
reign of the cricket; at intervals, to hear church-clocks or a little
solitary chapel-bell, under the brows of mighty hills, proclaiming
the hours of the night, and flinging out their sullen knells over
the graves where "the rude forefathers of the hamlet slept"--where
the strength and the loveliness of Elizabeth's time, or Cromwell's,
and through so many fleeting generations that have succeeded, had
long ago sunk to rest. Such was the sort of pleasure which I reaped
in my nightly walks--of which, however, considering the suspicions
of lunacy which it has sometimes awoke, the less I say, perhaps, the
better. Nine o'clock it was--and deadly cold as ever March night was
made by the keenest of black frosts, and by the bitterest of north
winds--when I drew towards the gate of our huge and hospitable friend.
A little garden there was before the house; and in the centre of this
garden was placed an arm-chair, upon which arm-chair was sitting
composedly--but I rubbed my eyes, doubting the very evidence of my own
eyesight--_a_ or _the_ huge man in his shirt-sleeves; yes, positively
not sunning but _mooning_ himself--apricating himself in the occasional
moonbeams; and, as if simple star-gazing from a sedentary station were
not sufficient on such a night, absolutely pursuing his astrological
studies, I repeat, in his shirt-sleeves! Could this be our hospitable
friend, the man-mountain? Secondly, was it any man at all? Might it
not be a scarecrow dressed up to frighten the birds? But from what--to
frighten them from what at that season of the year? Yet, again, it
might be an ancient scarecrow--a superannuated scarecrow, far advanced
in years. But, still, why should a scarecrow, young or old, sit in an
arm-chair? Suppose I were to ask. Yet, where was the use of asking a
scarecrow? And, if not a scarecrow, where was the safety of speaking
too inquisitively, on his own premises, to a man-mountain? The old
dilemma of the duel or the treadmill, if I should intrude upon his
grounds at night, occurred to me; and I watched the anomalous object
in silence for some minutes. At length the monster (for such at any
rate it was, scarecrow or not scarecrow) solemnly raised his hand to
his face, perhaps taking a pinch of snuff, and thereby settled one
question. But that settled only irritated my curiosity the more upon
a second: what hallucination of the brain was it that could induce a
living man to adopt so very absurd a line of conduct? Once I thought of
addressing him thus:--Might I presume so far upon your known courtesy
to wayfaring strangers as to ask--Is it the Devil who prompts you to
sit in your shirt-sleeves, as if meditating a _camisade_, or to woo
_al fresco_ pleasures on such a night as this? But, as Dr. Y., on
complaining that, whenever he looked out of the window, he was sure to
see Mr. X. lounging about the quadrangle, was effectually parried by
Mr. X. retorting that, whenever he lounged in the quadrangle, he was
sure to see the Doctor looking out of the window, so did I anticipate
a puzzling rejoinder from the former, with regard to my own motives
for haunting the roads as a nocturnal tramper, without a rational
object that I could make intelligible. I thought, also, of the fate
which attended the Calendars, and so many other notorious characters
in the "Arabian Nights," for unseasonable questions, or curiosity too
vivacious. And, upon the whole, I judged it advisable to pursue my
journey in silence, considering the time of night, the solitary place,
and the fancy of our enormous friend for "braining" those whom he
regarded as ugly customers. And thus it came about that this one house
has been loaded in my memory with a double mystery, that too probably
never _can_ be explained: and another torment had been prepared for the
curious of future ages.

Of Southey, meantime, I had learned, upon this brief and hurried
visit, so much in confirmation or in extension of my tolerably just
preconceptions with regard to his character and manners, as left me not
a very great deal to add, and nothing at all to alter, through the many
years which followed of occasional intercourse with his family, and
domestic knowledge of his habits. A man of more serene and even temper
could not be imagined; nor more uniformly cheerful in his tone of
spirits; nor more unaffectedly polite and courteous in his demeanour to
strangers; nor more hospitable in his own wrong--I mean by the painful
sacrifices which hospitality entailed upon him of time so exceedingly
precious that, during his winter and spring months of solitude, or
whenever he was left absolute master of its distribution, every half
hour in the day had its peculiar duty. In the still "weightier matters
of the law," in cases that involved appeals to conscience and high
moral principle, I believe Southey to be as exemplary a man as can ever
have lived. Were it to his own instant ruin, I am satisfied that he
would do justice and fulfil his duty under any possible difficulties,
and through the very strongest temptations to do otherwise. For honour
the most delicate, for integrity the firmest, and for generosity within
the limits of prudence, Southey cannot well have a superior; and,
in the lesser moralities--those which govern the daily habits, and
transpire through the manners--he is certainly a better man--that is
(with reference to the minor principle concerned), a more _amiable_
man--than Wordsworth. He is less capable, for instance, of usurping an
undue share of the conversation; he is more uniformly disposed to be
charitable in his transient colloquial judgments upon doubtful actions
of his neighbours; more gentle and winning in his condescensions to
inferior knowledge or powers of mind; more willing to suppose it
possible that he himself may have fallen into an error; more tolerant
of avowed indifference towards his own writings (though, by the way, I
shall have something to offer in justification of Wordsworth, upon this
charge); and, finally, if the reader will pardon a violent instance of
anti-climax, much more ready to volunteer his assistance in carrying a
lady's reticule or parasol.

As a more _amiable_ man (taking that word partly in the French sense,
partly also in the loftier English sense), it might be imagined
that Southey would be a more eligible companion than Wordsworth.
But this is not so; and chiefly for three reasons which more than
counterbalance Southey's greater amiability: _first_, because the
natural reserve of Southey, which I have mentioned before, makes it
peculiarly difficult to place yourself on terms of intimacy with him;
_secondly_, because the range of his conversation is more limited
than that of Wordsworth--dealing less with life and the interests of
life--more exclusively with books; _thirdly_, because the style of his
conversation is less flowing and diffusive--less expansive--more apt to
clothe itself in a keen, sparkling, aphoristic form--consequently much
sooner and more frequently coming to an abrupt close. A sententious,
epigrammatic form of delivering opinions has a certain effect of
_clenching_ a subject, which makes it difficult to pursue it without
a corresponding smartness of expression, and something of the same
antithetic point and equilibration of clauses. Not that the reader
is to suppose in Southey a showy master of rhetoric and colloquial
sword-play, seeking to strike and to dazzle by his brilliant hits or
adroit evasions. The very opposite is the truth. He seeks, indeed, to
be effective, not for the sake of display, but as the readiest means
of retreating from display, and the necessity for display: feeling
that his station in literature and his laurelled honours make him a
mark for the curiosity and interest of the company--that a standing
appeal is constantly turning to him for his opinion--a latent call
always going on for his voice on the question of the moment--he is
anxious to comply with this requisition at as slight a cost as may be
of thought and time. His heart is continually reverting to his wife,
viz. his library; and, that he may waste as little effort as possible
upon his conversational exercises--that the little he wishes to say
may appear pregnant with much meaning--he finds it advantageous, and,
moreover, the style of his mind naturally prompts him, to adopt a
trenchant, pungent, aculeated form of terse, glittering, stenographic
sentences--sayings which have the air of laying down the law without
any _locus penitentiæ_ or privilege of appeal, but are not meant to do
so; in short, aiming at brevity for the company as well as for himself,
by cutting off all opening for discussion and desultory talk through
the sudden winding up that belongs to a sententious aphorism. The
hearer feels that "the record is closed"; and he has a sense of this
result as having been accomplished by something like an oracular laying
down of the law _ex cathedra_: but this is an indirect collateral
impression from Southey's manner, and far from the one he meditates or
wishes. An oracular manner he does certainly affect in certain dilemmas
of a languishing or loitering conversation; not the peremptoriness,
meantime, not the imperiousness of the oracle is what he seeks for, but
its brevity, its dispatch, its conclusiveness.

Finally, as a fourth reason why Southey is less fitted for a genial
companion than Wordsworth, his spirits have been, of late years, in
a lower key than those of the latter. The tone of Southey's animal
spirits was never at any time raised beyond the standard of an ordinary
sympathy; there was in him no tumult, no agitation of passion;
his organic and constitutional sensibilities were healthy, sound,
perhaps strong--but not profound, not excessive. Cheerful he was, and
animated at all times; but he levied no tributes on the spirits or the
feelings beyond what all people could furnish. One reason why his
bodily temperament never, like that of Wordsworth, threw him into a
state of tumultuous excitement which required intense and elaborate
conversation to work off the excessive fervour, was, that, over and
above his far less fervid constitution of mind and body, Southey
rarely took any exercise; he led a life as sedentary, except for the
occasional excursions in summer (extorted from his sense of kindness
and hospitality), as that of a city tailor. And it was surprising to
many people, who did not know by experience the prodigious effect upon
the mere bodily health of regular and congenial mental labour, that
Southey should be able to maintain health so regular, and cheerfulness
so uniformly serene. Cheerful, however, he was, in those early years of
my acquaintance with him; but it was manifest to a thoughtful observer
that his golden equanimity was bound up in a threefold chain,--in a
conscience clear of all offence, in the recurring enjoyments from
his honourable industry, and in the gratification of his parental
affections. If any one cord should give way, there (it seemed) would
be an end to Southey's tranquillity. He had a son at that time,
Herbert[135] Southey, a child in petticoats when I first knew him, very
interesting even then, but annually putting forth fresh blossoms of
unusual promise, that made even indifferent people fear for the safety
of one so finely organized, so delicate in his sensibilities, and so
prematurely accomplished. As to his father, it became evident that
he lived almost in the light of young Herbert's smiles, and that the
very pulses of his heart played in unison to the sound of his son's
laughter. There was in his manner towards this child, and towards this
only, something that marked an excess of delirious doating, perfectly
unlike the ordinary chastened movements of Southey's affections; and
something also which indicated a vague fear about him; a premature
unhappiness, as if already the inaudible tread of calamity could be
perceived, as if already he had lost him; which, for the latter years
of the boy's life, seemed to poison the blessing of his presence.

A stronger evidence I cannot give of Southey's trembling
apprehensiveness about this child than that the only rude thing I ever
knew him to do, the only discourteous thing, was done on his account.
A party of us, chiefly composed of Southey's family and his visitors,
were in a sailboat upon the lake. Herbert was one of this party; and at
that time not above five or six years old. In landing upon one of the
islands, most of the gentlemen were occupied in assisting the ladies
over the thwarts of the boat; and one gentleman, merely a stranger,
observing this, good-naturedly took up Herbert in his arms, and was
stepping with him most carefully from thwart to thwart, when Southey,
in a perfect frenzy of anxiety for his boy, his "moon" as he used to
call him (I suppose from some pun of his own, or some mistake of the
child's upon the equivocal word _sun_), rushed forward, and tore him
out of the arms of the stranger without one word of apology; nor,
in fact, under the engrossing panic of the moment, lest an unsteady
movement along with the rocking and undulating of the boat should throw
his little boy overboard into the somewhat stormy waters of the lake,
did Southey become aware of his own exceedingly discourteous action:
fear for his boy quelled his very power of perception. _That_ the
stranger, on reflection, understood; a race of emotions travelled over
his countenance. I saw the whole, a silent observer from the shore.
First a hasty blush of resentment mingled with astonishment: then a
good-natured smile of indulgence to the _naïveté_ of the paternal
feeling as displaying itself in the act, and the accompanying gestures
of frenzied impatience; finally, a considerate, grave expression of
acquiescence in the whole act; but with a pitying look towards father
and son, as too probably destined under such agony of affection to
trials perhaps insupportable. If I interpreted aright the stranger's
feelings, he did not read their destinies amiss. Herbert became, with
his growing years, a child of more and more hope; but, therefore, the
object of more and more fearful solicitude. He read, and read; and he
became at last

to borrow a line from his uncle's beautiful poem on the wild boy who
fell into a heresy whilst living under the patronage of a Spanish
grandee, and finally escaped from a probable martyrdom by sailing up a
great American river, wide as any sea, after which he was never heard
of again. The learned youth of the river Greta had an earlier and
more sorrowful close to his career. Possibly from want of exercise,
combined with inordinate exercise of the cerebral organs, a disease
gradually developed itself in the heart. It was not a mere disorder
in the functions, it was a disease in the structure of the organ, and
admitted of no permanent relief, consequently of no final hope. He
died[136]; and with him died for ever the golden hopes, the radiant
felicity, and the internal serenity, of the unhappy father. It was from
Southey himself, speaking without external signs of agitation, calmly,
dispassionately, almost coldly, but with the coldness of a settled
despondency, that I heard, whilst accompanying him through Grasmere
on his road homewards to Keswick from some visit he had been paying
to Wordsworth at Rydal Mount, his settled feelings and convictions as
connected with that loss. For _him_, in this world, he said, happiness
there could be none; for his tenderest affections, the very deepest by
many degrees which he had ever known, were now buried in the grave with
his youthful and too brilliant Herbert!

De Quincey's recollection of the _Edinburgh Annual Register_ in
connexion with Southey is altogether erroneous. Though there had been
a project of some periodical of the kind by the Constable publishing
house as early as 1807, the enterprise was not started till 1809,
and then not by Constable at all, but actually in opposition to
Constable by the new Edinburgh publishing house of John Ballantyne,--or
rather, one might say, of Scott and Ballantyne, for Scott (secretly
Ballantyne's partner already for a long while in his printing business)
was Ballantyne's real backer and principal in the whole of this new
concern. In a letter of Scott's to his friend Merritt, of date 14th
January 1809, after announcing the great fact that a _Quarterly Review_
was forthcoming to counteract the _Edinburgh_, he adds:--"Then, sir,
to turn the flank of Messrs. Constable and Co., and to avenge myself
of certain impertinences which, in the vehemence of their Whiggery,
they have dared to indulge in towards me, I have prepared to start
against them at Whitsunday first the celebrated printer Ballantyne,
with a long purse ['the purse was, alas! Scott's own,' Lockhart notes
at this point] and a sound political creed, not to mention an alliance
offensive and defensive with young John Murray of Fleet Street, the
most enlightened and active of the London trade. By this means I hope
to counterbalance the predominating influence of Constable and Co.,
who at present have it in their power and inclination to forward or
suppress any book as they approve or dislike its political tendency.
Lastly, I have caused the said Ballantyne to venture upon an _Edinburgh
Annual Register_, of which I send you a prospectus. I intend to help
him myself as far as time will admit, and hope to procure him many
respectable coadjutors." In another letter, written just a fortnight
previously, Scott had broached the subject of the new _Annual Register_
to his friend Kirkpatrick Sharpe, intimating that, though Ballantyne
would be the managing editor, with himself for the real editor in
the background, all the more important contributions would be from
selected hands, and that, as the historical department was the most
important,--a luminous picture of the current events of the world from
year to year being "a task for a man of genius,"--they proposed to
give their "historian" £300 a year,--"no deaf nuts," adds Scott, in
comment on the sum. A certain eminent person had already been offered
the post, Scott proceeds; but, should "the great man" decline, would
Kirkpatrick Sharpe himself accept it? The "great man" was Southey; he
did accept; and for some years he had the accredited charge of the
historical department of the _Register_. From the first, however, the
venture did not pay; and, the loss upon it having gone on for some
time at the rate of £1000 a year, Scott,--who had been tending to a
reconciliation with Constable on other grounds,--was glad when, in
1813, Constable took a portion of the burden of the concern off his
hands. It is possible that this accession of Constable to a share in
the management, and some consequent retrenchment of expenses, may have
had something to do with Southey's resignation of his connexion with
the _Register_. Not, however, till 1815, if we may trust Lockhart's
dating, did that resignation take place,--for, in Lockhart's narrative
for the following year, 1816, where he notes that Scott had stepped
in for the rescue of the _Register_ by himself undertaking to do its
arrears in the historical department, he gives the reasons thus:--"Mr.
Southey had, for reasons on which I do not enter, discontinued his
services to that work; and it was now doubly necessary, after trying
for one year a less eminent hand, that, if the work were not to be
dropped altogether, some strenuous exertion should be made to sustain
its character."--From all this it will be seen that De Quincey is wrong
in his fancy that the proposal to reduce Southey's salary (from £400 to
£300, he says, but was it not £300 from the first?) was a mere device
for getting rid of him because he was an Englishman, and because a
Scottish "snob" of the Parliament House could be got to do the work
at a cheaper rate; or, at all events, that he is wrong in attributing
the shabbiness to Constable and the Whigs in Edinburgh. Southey's own
fellow-Tory Scott was still supreme in the conduct of the _Register_,
though he might take Constable's advice in all matters of its financial
administration; and, if Constable advised, among other things, a
reduction of Southey's salary in the historical department, that was
but natural in the circumstances, and Scott probably acquiesced.--In
fact, by this time the contributorship to the _Edinburgh Annual
Register_, always a drudgery, must have been of less consequence to
Southey than it had been. In November 1813 he had been appointed to the
office of Poet-Laureate, then vacant by the death of Henry James Pye;
and the salary attached to that sinecure, though small, was something.
On the 13th of that month Scott, who had declined the office for
himself and had strongly recommended Southey, and who was then still
virtually Southey's paymaster for his services in the _Edinburgh Annual
Register_, had written his congratulations to Southey, with his regrets
that the Laureateship was not better worth his while.--D. M.

A circumstance which, as much as anything, expounded to every eye the
characteristic distinctions between Wordsworth and Southey, and would
not suffer a stranger to forget it for a moment, was the insignificant
place and consideration allowed to the small book-collection of the
former, contrasted with the splendid library of the latter. The two
or three hundred volumes of Wordsworth occupied a little, homely,
painted book-case, fixed into one of two shallow recesses, formed on
each side of the fireplace by the projection of the chimney in the
little sitting-room up stairs which he had already described as his
half kitchen and half parlour. They were ill bound, or not bound at
all--in boards, sometimes in tatters; many were imperfect as to the
number of volumes, mutilated as to the number of pages; sometimes,
where it seemed worth while, the defects being supplied by manuscript;
sometimes not: in short, everything showed that the books were for use,
and not for show; and their limited amount showed that their possessor
must have independent sources of enjoyment to fill up the major part
of his time. In reality, when the weather was tolerable, I believe
that Wordsworth rarely resorted to his books (unless, perhaps, to some
little pocket edition of a poet which accompanied him in his rambles)
except in the evenings, or after he had tired himself by walking. On
the other hand, Southey's collection occupied a separate room, the
largest, and every way the most agreeable in the house; and this room
was styled, and not ostentatiously (for it really merited that name),
the Library. The house itself, Greta Hall, stood upon a little eminence
(as I have before mentioned), overhanging the river Greta. There was
nothing remarkable in its internal arrangements. In all respects it
was a very plain, unadorned family dwelling: large enough, by a little
contrivance, to accommodate two, or, in some sense, three families,
viz. Mr. Southey and _his_ family, Mr. Coleridge and _his_, together
with Mrs. Lovell, who, when her son was with her, might be said to
compose a third. Mrs. Coleridge, Mrs. Southey, and Mrs. Lovell were
sisters; all having come originally from Bristol; and, as the different
sets of children in this one house had each three several aunts, all
the ladies, by turns, assuming that relation twice over, it was one
of Southey's many amusing jests, to call the hill on which Greta Hall
was placed the _ant-hill_. Mrs. Lovell was the widow of Mr. Robert
Lovell, who had published a volume of poems, in conjunction with
Southey, somewhere about the year 1797, under the signatures of Bion
and Moschus. This lady, having only one son, did not require any large
suite of rooms; and the less so, as her son quitted her at an early
age, to pursue a professional education. The house had, therefore, been
divided (not by absolute partition into two distinct[138] apartments,
but by an amicable distribution of rooms) between the two families of
Mr. Coleridge and Mr. Southey; Mr. Coleridge had a separate study,
which was distinguished by nothing except by an organ amongst its
furniture, and by a magnificent view from its window (or windows),
if that could be considered a distinction in a situation whose local
necessities presented you with magnificent objects in whatever
direction you might happen to turn your eyes.

In the morning, the two families might live apart; but they met
at dinner, and in a common drawing-room; and Southey's library, in
both senses of the word, was placed at the service of all the ladies
alike. However, they did not intrude upon him, except in cases where
they wished for a larger reception room, or a more interesting place
for suggesting the topics of conversation. Interesting this room
was, indeed, and in a degree not often rivalled. The library--the
collection of books, I mean, which formed the most conspicuous part
of its furniture within--was in all senses a good one. The books were
chiefly English, Spanish, and Portuguese; well selected, being the
great cardinal classics of the three literatures; fine copies, and
decorated externally with a reasonable elegance, so as to make them
in harmony with the other embellishments of the room. This effect
was aided by the horizontal arrangement upon brackets of many rare
manuscripts--Spanish or Portuguese. Made thus gay within, this room
stood in little need of attractions from without. Yet, even upon the
gloomiest day of winter, the landscape from the different windows was
too permanently commanding in its grandeur, too essentially independent
of the seasons or the pomp of woods, to fail in fascinating the gaze of
the coldest and dullest of spectators. The lake of Derwent Water in one
direction, with its lovely islands--a lake about ten miles in circuit,
and shaped pretty much like a boy's kite; the lake of Bassinthwaite
in another; the mountains of Newlands, arranging themselves like
pavilions; the gorgeous confusion of Borrowdale just revealing its
sublime chaos through the narrow vista of its gorge: all these objects
lay in different angles to the front; whilst the sullen rear, not
fully visible on this side of the house, was closed for many a league
by the vast and towering masses of Skiddaw and Blencathara--mountains
which are rather to be considered as frontier barriers, and chains of
hilly ground, cutting the county of Cumberland into great chambers and
different climates, than as insulated eminences, so vast is the area
which they occupy; though there _are_ also such separate and insulated
heights, and nearly amongst the highest in the country. Southey's lot
had therefore fallen, locally considered, into a goodly heritage.
This grand panorama of mountain scenery, so varied, so expansive,
and yet having the delightful feeling about it of a deep seclusion
and dell-like sequestration from the world--a feeling which, in the
midst of so expansive an area spread out below his windows, could not
have been sustained by any barriers less elevated than Glaramara,
Skiddaw, or (which could be also descried) "the mighty Helvellyn and
Catchedicam,"--this congregation of hill and lake, so wide, and yet so
prison-like in its separation from all beyond it, lay for ever under
the eyes of Southey. His position locally, and, in some respects,
intellectually, reminded one of Gibbon: but with great advantage in
the comparison to Southey. The little town of Keswick and its adjacent
lake bore something of the same relation to mighty London that Geneva
and its lake may be thought to bear towards brilliant Paris. Southey,
like Gibbon, was a miscellaneous scholar; he, like Gibbon, of vast
historical research; he, like Gibbon, signally industrious, and
patient, and elaborate in collecting the materials for his historical
works. Like Gibbon, he had dedicated a life of competent ease, in a
pecuniary sense, to literature; like Gibbon, he had gathered to the
shores of a beautiful lake, remote from great capitals, a large, or, at
least, sufficient library (in each case, I believe, the library ranged,
as to numerical amount, between seven and ten thousand); and, like
Gibbon, he was the most accomplished _littérateur_ amongst the erudite
scholars of his time, and the most of an erudite scholar amongst the
accomplished _littérateurs_. After all these points of agreement
known, it remains as a pure advantage on the side of Southey--a mere
_lucro ponatur_--that he was a poet; and, by all men's confession, a
respectable poet, brilliant in his descriptive powers, and fascinating
in his narration, however much he might want of

     "The vision and the faculty divine."

It is remarkable amongst the series of parallelisms that have been
or might be pursued between two men, that both had the honour of
retreating from a parliamentary life[139]; Gibbon, after some silent
and inert experience of that warfare; Southey, with a prudent foresight
of the ruin to his health and literary usefulness, won from the
experience of his nearest friends.

I took leave of Southey in 1807, at the descent into the vale of
Legbesthwaite, as I have already noticed. One year afterwards, I
became a permanent resident in his neighbourhood; and, although, on
various accounts, my intercourse with him was at no time very strict,
partly from the very uncongenial constitution of my own mind, and the
different direction of my studies, partly from my reluctance to levy
any tax on time so precious and so fully employed, I was yet on such
terms for the next ten or eleven years that I might, in a qualified
sense, call myself his friend.

Yes! there were long years through which Southey might respect me,
I _him_. But the years came--for I have lived too long, reader, in
relation to many things! and the report of me would have been better,
or more uniform at least, had I died some twenty years ago--the years
came in which circumstances made me an Opium Eater; years through
which a shadow as of sad eclipse sate and rested upon my faculties;
years through which I was careless of all but those who lived within
_my_ inner circle, within "my hearts of hearts"; years--ah! heavenly
years!--through which I lived, beloved, _with_ thee, _to_ thee, _for_
thee, _by_ thee! Ah! happy, happy years! in which I was a mere football
of reproach, but in which every wind and sounding hurricane of wrath
or contempt flew by like chasing enemies past some defying gates of
adamant, and left me too blessed in thy smiles--angel of life!--to
heed the curses or the mocking which sometimes I heard raving outside
of our impregnable Eden. What any man said of me in those days, what
he thought, did I ask? did I care? Then it was, or nearly then, that
I ceased to see, ceased to hear of Southey; as much abstracted from
all which concerned the world outside, and from the Southeys, or even
the Coleridges, in its van, as though I had lived with the darlings of
my heart in the centre of Canadian forests, and all men else in the
centre of Hindostan.

But, before I part from Greta Hall and its distinguished master, one
word let me say, to protect myself from the imputation of sharing
in some peculiar opinions of Southey, with respect to political
economy, which have been but too familiar to the world, and some
opinions of the world, hardly less familiar, with respect to Southey
himself and his accomplishments. Probably, with respect to the first,
before this paper will be made public, I shall have sufficiently
vindicated my own opinions in these matters by a distinct treatment
of some great questions which lie at the base of all sound political
economy; above all, the radical question of value, upon which no man
has ever seen the full truth except Mr. Ricardo; and, unfortunately,
he had but little of the _polemic_[140] skill which is required to
meet the errors of his opponents. For it is noticeable that the most
conspicuous of those opponents, viz. Mr. Malthus, though too much, I
fear, actuated by a spirit of jealousy, and therefore likely enough
to have scattered sophistry and disingenuous quibbling over the
subject, had no need whatever of any further confusion for darkening
and perplexing his themes than what inevitably belonged to his own
most chaotic understanding. He and Say, the Frenchman, were both
plagued by understandings of the same quality--having a clear vision
in shallow waters, and this misleading them into the belief that they
saw with equal clearness through the remote and the obscure; whereas,
universally, their acuteness is like that of Hobbes--the gift of
shallowness, and the result of _not_ being subtle or profound enough to
apprehend the true _locus_ of the difficulty; and the barriers, which
to them limit the view, and give to it, together with the contraction,
all the distinctness and definite outline of limitation, are, in nine
cases out of ten, the product of their own defective and aberrating
vision, and not real barriers at all.

Meantime, until I write fully and deliberately upon this subject, I
shall observe, simply, that all "the Lake Poets," as they are called,
were not only in error, but most presumptuously in error, upon these
subjects. They were ignorant of every principle belonging to every
question alike in political economy, and they were obstinately bent
upon learning nothing; they were all alike too proud to acknowledge
that any man knew better than they, unless it were upon some purely
professional subject, or some art remote from all intellectual
bearings, such as conferred no honour in its possession. Wordsworth was
the least tainted with error upon political economy; and that because
he rarely applied his thoughts to any question of that nature, and, in
fact, despised every study of a moral or political aspect, unless it
drew its materials from such revelations of truth as could be won from
the _prima philosophia_ of human nature approached with the poet's eye.
Coleridge was the one whom Nature and his own multifarious studies had
the best qualified for thinking justly on a theme such as this; but he
also was shut out from the possibility of knowledge by presumption, and
the habit of despising all the analytic studies of his own day--a habit
for which he certainly had some warrant in the peculiar feebleness
of all that has offered itself for _philosophy_ in modern England.
In particular, the religious discussions of the age, which touch
inevitably at every point upon the profounder philosophy of man and his
constitution, had laid bare the weakness of his own age to Coleridge's
eye; and, because all was hollow and trivial in this direction, he
chose to think that it was so in every other. And hence he has laid
himself open to the just scoffs of persons far inferior to himself.
In a foot-note in some late number of the _Westminster Review_, it
is most truly asserted (not in these words, but to this effect) that
Coleridge's "Table Talk" exhibits a superannuation of error fit only
for two centuries before. And what gave peculiar point to this display
of ignorance was, that Coleridge did not, like Wordsworth, dismiss
political economy from his notice disdainfully, as a puerile tissue
of truisms, or of falsehoods not less obvious, but actually addressed
himself to the subject; fancied he had made discoveries in the science;
and even promised us a systematic work on its whole compass.

To give a sample of this new and reformed political economy, it cannot
well be necessary to trouble the reader with more than one chimera
culled from those which Mr. Coleridge first brought forward in his
early model of "The Friend." He there propounds, as an original
hypothesis of his own, that taxation never burthens a people, or, as
a mere possibility, _can_ burthen a people simply by its amount. And
why? Surely it draws from the purse of him who pays the quota a sum
which it may be very difficult or even ruinous for him to pay, were it
no more important in a public point of view than as so much deducted
from his own unproductive expenditure, and which may happen to have
even a national importance if it should chance to be deducted from
the funds destined to productive industry. What is Mr. Coleridge's
answer to these little objections? Why, thus: the latter case he
evades entirely, apparently not adverting to it as a case in any
respect distinguished from the other; and this other--how is _that_
answered? Doubtless, says Mr. Coleridge, it may be inconvenient to
John or Samuel that a sum of money, otherwise disposable for their own
separate uses, should be abstracted for the purchase of bayonets, or
grape-shot; but with this the public, the commonwealth, have nothing
to do, any more than with the losses at a gaming-table, where A's loss
is B's gain--the total funds of the nation remaining exactly the same.
It is, in fact, nothing but the accidental distribution of the funds
which is affected--possibly for the worse (no other "worse," however,
is contemplated than shifting it into hands less deserving), but,
also, by possibility, for the better; and the better and the worse
may be well supposed, in the long run, to balance each other. And
that this is Mr. Coleridge's meaning cannot be doubted, upon looking
into his illustrative image in support of it: he says that money
raised by Government in the shape of taxes is like moisture exhaled
from the earth--doubtless, for the moment injurious to the crops, but
reacting abundantly for their final benefit when returning in the
shape of showers. So natural, so obvious, so inevitable, by the way,
is this conceit (or, to speak less harshly, this hypothesis), and so
equally natural, obvious, and inevitable is the illustration from the
abstraction and restoration of moisture, the exhalations and rains
which affect this earth of ours, like the systole and the diastole of
the heart, the flux and reflux of the ocean, that precisely the same
doctrine, and precisely the same exemplification of the doctrine,
is to be found in a Parliamentary speech[141] of some orator in the
famous Long Parliament about the year 1642. And to my mind it was a
bitter humiliation to find, about 150 years afterwards, in a shallow
French work, the famous "_Compte Rendu_" of the French Chancellor of
the Exchequer (Comptroller of the Finances) Neckar--in that work, most
humiliating it was to me, on a certain day, that I found this idle
Coleridgian fantasy, not merely repeated, as it had been by scores--not
merely anticipated by full twenty and two years, so that these French
people had been beforehand with him, and had made Coleridge, to all
appearance, their plagiarist, but also (hear it, ye gods!) answered,
satisfactorily refuted, by this very feeble old sentimentalist, Neckar.
Yes; positively Neckar, the slipshod old system-fancier and political
driveller, had been so much above falling into the shallow snare, that
he had, on sound principles, exposed its specious delusions. Coleridge,
the subtlest of men in his proper walk, had brought forward, as a
novel hypothesis of his own, in 1810, what Neckar, the rickety old
charlatan, had scarcely condescended, in a hurried foot-note, to expose
as a vulgar error and the shallowest of sophisms in 1787-88. There was
another enormous blunder which Coleridge was constantly authorizing,
both in his writings and his conversation. Quoting a passage from Sir
James Stuart, in which he speaks of a vine-dresser as adding nothing to
the public wealth, unless his labour did something more than replace
his own consumption--that is, unless it reproduced it together with a
profit; he asks contemptuously, whether the happiness and moral dignity
that may have been exhibited in the vine-dresser's family are to pass
for nothing? And then he proceeds to abuse the economists, because
they take no account of such important considerations. Doubtless these
are invaluable elements of social grandeur, in a _total_ estimate
of those elements. But what has political economy to do with them,
a science openly professing to insulate, and to treat apart from
all other constituents of national well-being, those which concern
the production and circulation of wealth?[142] So far from gaining
anything by enlarging its field in the way demanded by Coleridge's
critic, political economy would be as idly travelling out of the limits
indicated and held forth in its very name, as if logic were to teach
ethics, or ethics to teach diplomacy. With respect to the Malthusian
doctrine of population, it is difficult to know who was the true
proprietor of the arguments urged against it sometimes by Southey,
sometimes by Coleridge. Those used by Southey are chiefly to be found
up and down the _Quarterly Review_. But a more elaborate attack was
published by Hazlitt; and this must be supposed to speak the peculiar
objections of Coleridge, for he was in the habit of charging Hazlitt
with having pillaged his conversation, and occasionally garbled it
throughout the whole of this book. One single argument there was,
undoubtedly just, and it was one which others stumbled upon no less
than Coleridge, exposing the fallacy of the supposed different laws
of increase for vegetable and animal life. But, though this frail
prop withdrawn took away from Mr. Malthus's theory all its scientific
rigour, the main _practical_ conclusions were still valid as respected
any argument from the Lakers; for the strongest of these arguments that
ever came to my knowledge was a mere appeal--not _ad verecundiam_, in
the ordinary sense of the phrase, but _ad honestatem_, as if it were
shocking to the _honestum_ of Roman ethics (the _honnêteté_ of French
minor ethics) that the check derived from self-restraint should not be
supposed amply competent to redress all the dangers from a redundant
population under any certain knowledge generally diffused that such
dangers existed. But these are topics which it is sufficient in this
place to have noticed _currente calamo_. I was anxious, however, to
protest against the probable imputation that I, because generally so
intense an admirer of these men, adopted their blind and hasty reveries
in political economy.

There were (and perhaps more justly I might say there are) two other
notions currently received about Southey, one of which is altogether
erroneous, and the other true only in a limited sense. The first is
the belief that he belonged to what is known as the Lake school in
poetry; with respect to which all that I need say in this place is
involved in his own declaration frankly made to myself in Easedale,
during the summer of 1812: that he considered Wordsworth's theory of
poetic diction, and still more his principles as to the selection of
subjects, and as to what constituted a poetic treatment, as founded on
error. There is certainly some community of phraseology between Southey
and the other Lakers, naturally arising out of their joint reverence
for Scriptural language: this was a field in which they met in common:
else it shows but little discernment and power of valuing the essences
of things, to have classed Southey in the same school with Wordsworth
and Coleridge. The other popular notion about Southey which I conceive
to be expressed with much too little limitation regards his style.
He has been praised, and justly, for his plain, manly, unaffected
English, until the parrot echoers of other men's judgments, who adopt
all they relish with undistinguishing blindness, have begun to hold
him up as a great master of his own language, and a classical model
of fine composition. Now, if the error were only in the degree, it
would not be worth while to notice it; but the truth is, that Southey's
defects in this particular power are as striking as his characteristic
graces. Let a subject arise--and almost in any path there is a ready
possibility that it should--in which a higher tone is required, of
splendid declamation, or of impassionate fervour, and Southey's
style will immediately betray its want of the loftier qualities as
flagrantly as it now asserts its powers in that unpretending form
which is best suited to his level character of writing and his humbler
choice of themes. It is to mistake the character of Southey's mind,
which is elevated but not sustained by the higher modes of enthusiasm,
to think otherwise. Were a magnificent dedication required, moving
with a stately and measured solemnity, and putting forward some
majestic pretensions, arising out of a long and laborious life; were
a pleading required against some capital abuse of the earth--war,
slavery, oppression in its thousand forms; were a _Defensio pro Populo
Anglicano_ required; Southey's is not the mind, and, by a necessary
consequence, Southey's is not the style, for carrying such purposes
into full and memorable effect. His style is _therefore_ good, because
it has been suited to his themes; and those themes have hitherto been
either narrative, which usually imposes a modest diction, and a modest
structure of sentences, or argumentative in that class which is too
overburthened with details, with replies, with interruption, and every
mode of discontinuity, to allow a thought of eloquence, or of the
periodic style which a perfect eloquence instinctively seeks.

I here close my separate notice of the Lake Poets--meaning those
three who were originally so denominated--three men upon whom
posterity, in every age, will look back with interest as profound as,
perhaps, belongs to any other names of our era; for it happens, not
unfrequently, that the _personal_ interest in the author is not in the
direct ratio of that which belongs to his works: and the character
of an author better qualified to command a vast popularity for the
creations of his pen is oftentimes more of a universal character,
less peculiar, less fitted to stimulate the curiosity, or to sustain
the sympathy of the intellectual, than the profounder and more
ascetic solemnity of a Wordsworth, or the prodigal and magnificent
eccentricities of a Coleridge. With respect to both of these gifted
men, some interesting notices still remain in arrear; but these will
more properly come forward in their natural places, as they happen to
arise in after years in connexion with my own memoirs.

My first visit to the Wordsworths had been made in November, 1807;
but, on that occasion, from the necessity of saving the Michaelmas
Term at Oxford, for which I had barely left myself time, I stayed only
one week. On the last day, I witnessed a scene, the first and the last
of its kind that ever I _did_ witness, almost too trivial to mention,
except for the sake of showing what things occur in the realities of
experience which a novelist could not venture to imagine. Wordsworth
and his sister were under an engagement of some standing to dine on
that day with a literary lady about four miles distant; and, as the
southern mail, which I was to catch at a distance of eighteen miles,
would not pass that point until long after midnight, Miss Wordsworth
proposed that, rather than pass my time at an inn, I should join the
dinner party; a proposal rather more suitable to her own fervent and
hospitable temper than to the habits of our hostess, who must (from
what I came to know of her in after years) have looked upon me as an
intruder. Something _had_ reached Miss Wordsworth of her penurious
_ménage_, but nothing that approached the truth. I was presented to the
lady, whom we found a perfect _bas bleu_ of a very commonplace order,
but having some other accomplishments beyond her slender acquaintance
with literature. Our party consisted of six--our hostess, who might
be about fifty years of age; a pretty timid young woman, who was
there in the character of a humble friend; some stranger or other;
the Wordsworths, and myself. The dinner was the very humblest and
simplest I had ever seen--in that there was nothing to offend--I did
not then know that the lady was very rich--but also it was flagrantly
insufficient in quantity. Dinner, however, proceeded; when, without any
removals, in came a kind of second course, in the shape of a solitary
pheasant. This, in a cold manner, she asked me to try; but we, in our
humility, declined for the present; and also in mere good-nature, not
wishing to expose too palpably the insufficiency of her dinner. May I
die the death of a traitor, if she did not proceed, without further
question to any one of us (and, as to the poor young companion, no
form of even invitation was conceded to her), and, in the eyes of
us all, eat up the whole bird, from alpha to omega. Upon my honour,
I thought to myself, this is a scene I would not have missed. It is
well to know the possibilities of human nature. Could she have a bet
depending on the issue, and would she explain all to us as soon as she
had won her wager? Alas! no explanation ever came, except, indeed, that
afterwards her character, put _en evidence_ upon a score of occasions,
too satisfactorily explained everything. No; it was, as Mr. Coleridge
expresses it, a psychological curiosity--a hollow thing--and only once
matched in all the course of my reading, in or out of romances; but
that once, I grieve to say it, was by a king, and a sort of hero.

The Duchess of Marlborough it is who reports the shocking anecdote
of William III, that actually Princess Anne, his future wife, durst
not take any of the green peas brought to the dinner table, when that
vegetable happened to be as yet scarce and premature. _There_ was a
gentleman! And such a lady had we for our hostess. However, we all
observed a suitable gravity; but afterwards, when we left the house,
the remembrance affected us differently. Miss Wordsworth laughed with
undissembled glee; but Wordsworth thought it too grave a matter for
laughing--he was thoroughly disgusted, and said repeatedly, "A person
cannot be honest, positively not honest, who is capable of such an
act." The lady is dead, and I shall not mention her name: she lived
only to gratify her selfish propensities; and two little anecdotes
may show the outrageous character of her meanness. I was now on the
debtor side of her dinner account, and, therefore, in a future year she
readily accepted an invitation to come and dine with me at my cottage.
But, on a subsequent occasion, when I was to have a few literary people
at dinner, whom I knew that she greatly wished to meet, she positively
replied thus:--"No; I have already come with my young lady to dine
with you; that puts me on the wrong side by one; now, if I were to
come again, as I cannot leave Miss ---- behind, I shall then be on the
wrong side by three; and that is more than I could find opportunities
to repay before I go up to London for the winter." "Very well," I said;
"give me 3s. and _that_ will settle the account." She laughed, but
positively persisted in not coming until after dinner, notwithstanding
she had to drive a distance of ten miles.

The other anecdote is worse. She was exceedingly careful of her health;
and not thinking it healthy to drive about in a close carriage,--which,
besides, could not have suited the narrow mountain tracks, to which
her sketching habits attracted her,--she shut up her town carriage for
the summer, and jobbed some little open car. Being a very large woman,
and, moreover, a masculine woman, with a bronzed complexion, and always
choosing to wear, at night, a turban, round hair that was as black
as that of the "Moors of Malabar," she presented an exact likeness
of a Saracen's Head, as painted over inn-doors; whilst the timid and
delicate young lady by her side looked like "dejected Pity" at the side
of "Revenge" when assuming the war-denouncing trumpet. Some Oxonians
and Cantabs, who, at different times, were in the habit of meeting this
oddly assorted party in all nooks of the country, used to move the
question, whether the poor horse or the young lady had the worst of it?
At length the matter was decided: the horse was fast going off this
sublunary stage; and the Saracen's Head was told as much, and with this
little addition,--that his death was owing _inter alia_ to starvation.
Her answer was remarkable:--"But, my dear madam, that is his master's
fault; I pay so much a-day--he is to keep the horse." That might be,
but still the horse was dying, and dying in the way stated. The
Saracen's Head persisted in using him under those circumstances--such
was her "bond"--and in a short time the horse actually died. Yes, the
horse died--and died of starvation--or at least of an illness caused
originally by starvation: for so said, not merely the whole population
of the little neighbouring town, but also the surgeon. Not long after,
however, the lady, the Saracen's Head, died herself; but I fear _not_
of starvation; for, though something like it did prevail at her table,
she prudently reserved it all for her guests; in fact, I never heard
of such vigilant care, and so much laudable exertion, applied to the
promotion of health: yet all failed, and, in a degree which confounded
people's speculations upon the subject--for she did not live much
beyond sixty; whereas everybody supposed that the management of her
physical system entitled her to outwear a century. Perhaps the prayers
of horses might avail to order it otherwise.

But the singular thing about this lady's mixed and contradictory
character was, that in London and Bath, where her peculiar habits
of life were naturally less accurately known, she maintained the
reputation of one who united the accomplishments of literature and art
with a remarkable depth of sensibility, and a most amiable readiness
to enter into the distresses of her friends by sympathy the most
cordial and consolation the most delicate. More than once I have
seen her name recorded in printed books, and attended with praises
that tended to this effect. I have seen letters also from a lady in
deep affliction which spoke of the Saracen's Head as having paid her
the first visit from which she drew any effectual consolation. Such
are the erroneous impressions conveyed by biographical memoirs; or,
which is a more charitable construction of the case, such are the
inconsistencies of the human heart! And certainly there was one fact,
even in her Westmoreland life, that _did_ lend some countenance to the
southern picture of her amiableness: and this lay in the cheerfulness
with which she gave up her time (_time_, but not much of her redundant
money) to the promotion of the charitable schemes set on foot by the
neighbouring ladies; sometimes for the education of poor children,
sometimes for the visiting of the sick, &c., &c. I have heard several
of those ladies express their gratitude for her exertions, and
declare that she was about their best member. But their horror was
undisguised when the weekly committee came, by rotation, to hold its
sittings at her little villa; for, as the business occupied them
frequently from eleven o'clock in the forenoon to a late dinner hour,
and as many of them had a fifteen or twenty miles' drive, they needed
some refreshments: but these were, of course, a "great idea" at the
Saracen's Head; since, according to the epigram which illustrates the
maxim of Tacitus that _omne ignotum pro magnifico_, and, applying it
to the case of a miser's horse, terminates by saying, "What vast ideas
must he have of oats!"--upon the same principle these poor ladies,
on those fatal committee days, never failed to form most exaggerated
ideas of bread, butter, and wine. And at length some, more intrepid
than the rest, began to carry biscuits in their muffs, and, with the
conscious tremors of school girls (profiting by the absence of the
mistress but momentarily expecting detection), they employed some
casual absence of their unhostly hostess in distributing and eating
their hidden "viaticum." However, it must be acknowledged, that time
and exertion, and the sacrifice of more selfish pleasure during the
penance at the school, were, after all, real indications of kindness
to her fellow-creatures; and, as I wish to part in peace even with
the Saracen's Head, I have reserved this anecdote to the last: for
it is painful to have lived on terms of good nature, and exchanging
civilities, with any human being of whom one can report absolutely _no_
good thing; and I sympathize heartily with that indulgent person of
whom it is somewhere recorded that, upon an occasion when the death of
a man happened to be mentioned who was unanimously pronounced a wretch
without one good quality, "_monstrum nullâ virtute redemptum_," he
ventured, however, at last, in a deprecatory tone to say--"Well, he did
_whistle_ beautifully, at any rate."

Talking of "whistling" reminds me to return from my digression; for on
that night, the 12th of November, 1807, and the last of my visits to
the Wordsworths, I took leave of them in the inn at Ambleside about
ten at night; and the post-chaise in which I crossed the country to
catch the mail was driven by a postilion who whistled so delightfully
that, for the first time in my life, I became aware of the prodigious
powers which are lodged potentially in so despised a function of the
vocal organs. For the whole of the long ascent up Orrest Head, which
obliged him to walk his horses for a full half-mile, he made the woods
of Windermere ring with the canorous sweetness of his half flute,
half clarionet music; but, in fact, the subtle melody of the effect
placed it in power far beyond either flute or clarionet. A year or two
afterwards, I heard a fellow-servant of this same postilion's, a black,
play with equal superiority of effect upon the jew's harp; making that,
which in most hands is a mere monotonous jarring, a dull reverberating
vibration, into a delightful lyre of no inconsiderable compass. We
have since heard of, some of us have heard, the chinchopper. Within
the last hundred years, we have had the Æolian harp (first mentioned
and described in the "Castle of Indolence," which I think was first
published entire about 1738[144]); then the musical glasses; then the
_celestina_, to represent the music of the spheres, introduced by Mr.
Walker, or some other lecturing astronomer; and many another fine
effect obtained from trivial means. But, at this moment, I recollect a
performance perhaps more astonishing than any of them. A Mr. Worgman,
who had very good introductions, and very general ones (for he was
to be met within a few months in every part of the island), used to
accompany himself on the piano, weaving _extempore_ long tissues of
impassioned music, that were called his own, but which, in fact,
were all the better for not being such, or at least for continually
embodying passages from Handel and Pergolesi. To this substratum of
the instrumental music he contrived to adapt some unaccountable and
indescribable choral accompaniment, a pomp of sound, a tempestuous
blare of harmony ascending in clouds not from any one, but apparently
from a band of Mr. Worgman's; for sometimes it was a trumpet, sometimes
a kettle-drum, sometimes a cymbal, sometimes a bassoon, and sometimes
it was all of these at once.

     "And now 'twas like all instruments;
       And now it was a flute;
     And now it was an angel's voice,
       That maketh the heavens be mute."

In this case I presume that ventriloquism must have had something to
do with the effect; but, whatever it were, the power varied greatly
with the state of his spirits, or with some other fluctuating causes in
the animal economy. However, the result of all these experiences is,
that I shall never more be surprised at any musical effects, the very
greatest, drawn from whatever inconsiderable or apparently inadequate
means; not even if the butcher's instrument, the marrow-bones and
cleaver, or any of those culinary instruments so pleasantly treated by
Addison in the "Spectator," such as the kitchen dresser and thumb, the
tongs and shovel, the pepper and salt-box, should be exalted, by some
immortal butcher or inspired scullion, into a sublime harp, dulcimer,
or lute, capable of wooing St. Cecilia to listen, able even

     "To raise a mortal to the skies,
     Or draw an angel down."

That night, as I was passing under the grounds of Elleray, then
belonging to a Westmoreland "statesman," a thought struck me, that I
was now traversing a road with which, as yet, I was scarcely at all
acquainted, but which, in years to come, might perhaps be as familiar
to my eye as the rooms of my own house; and possibly that I might
traverse them in company with faces as yet not even seen by me, but
in those future years dearer than any which I had yet known. In this
prophetic glimpse there was nothing very marvellous; for what could be
more natural than that I should come to reside in the neighbourhood of
the Wordsworths, and that this might lead to my forming connexions in
a country which I should consequently come to know so well? I did not,
however, anticipate so definitely and circumstantially as all this;
but generally I had a dim presentiment that here, on this very road,
I should often pass, and in company that, now not even conjecturally
delineated or drawn out of the utter darkness in which they were as
yet reposing, would hereafter plant memories in my heart, the last
that will fade from it in the hour of death. Here, afterwards, at this
very spot, or a little above it, but on this very estate, which from
local peculiarities of ground, and of sudden angles, was peculiarly
_kenspeck_, _i.e._ easy of recognition,[145] and could have been
challenged and identified at any distance of years; here afterwards
lived Professor Wilson, the only very intimate male friend I have
had; here, too, it was, my M.,[146] that, in long years afterwards,
through many a score of nights--nights often dark as Erebus, and amidst
thunders and lightnings the most sublime--we descended at twelve, one,
and two o'clock at night, speeding from Kendal to our distant home,
twenty miles away. Thou wert at present a child not nine years old, nor
had I seen thy face, nor heard thy name. But within nine years from
that same night thou wert seated by my side;--and, thenceforwards,
through a period of fourteen years, how often did we two descend,
hand locked in hand, and thinking of things to come, at a pace of
hurricane; whilst all the sleeping woods about us re-echoed the uproar
of trampling hoofs and groaning wheels. Duly as we mounted the crest of
Orrest Head, mechanically and of themselves almost, and spontaneously,
without need of voice or spur, according to Westmoreland usage, the
horses flew off into a gallop, like the pace of a swallow.[147] It
was a railroad pace that we ever maintained; objects were descried
far ahead in one moment, and in the next were crowding into the rear.
Three miles and a half did this storm-flight continue, for so long the
descent lasted. Then, for many a mile, over undulating ground, did we
alternately creep and fly, until again a long precipitous movement,
again a storm-gallop, that hardly suffered the feet to touch the
ground, gave warning that we drew near to that beloved cottage; warning
to us--warning to them:--

           "The silence that is here
     Is of the grave, and of austere
     But happy feelings of the dead."

Sometimes the nights were bright with cloudless moonlight, and of
that awful breathless quiet which often broods over vales that are
peculiarly landlocked, and which is, or seems to be, so much more
expressive of a solemn hush and a Sabbath-like rest from the labours of
nature than I remember to have experienced in flat countries:--

     "It is not quiet--is not peace--
     But something deeper far than these."

And on such nights it was no sentimental refinement, but a sincere
and hearty feeling, that, in wheeling past the village churchyard of
Stavely, something like an outrage seemed offered to the sanctity of
its graves by the uproar of our career. Sometimes the nights were of
that pitchy darkness which is more palpable and unfathomable wherever
hills intercept the gleaming of light which otherwise is usually seen
to linger about the horizon in the northern quarter; and then arose in
perfection that striking effect when the glare of lamps searches for
one moment every dark recess of the thickets, forces them into sudden,
almost daylight, revelation, only to leave them within the twinkling of
the eye in darkness more profound; making them, like the snow-flakes
falling upon a cataract, "one moment bright, then gone for ever." But,
dark or moonlight alike, in every instance throughout so long a course
of years, the road was entirely our own for the whole twenty miles.
After nine o'clock not many people are abroad, after ten absolutely
none, upon the roads of Westmoreland; a circumstance which gives a
peculiar solemnity to a traveller's route amongst these quiet valleys
upon a summer evening of latter May, of June, or early July; since, in
a latitude so much higher than that of London, broad daylight prevails
to an hour long after nine. Nowhere is the holiness of vesper hours
more deeply felt.

Ay, reader, all this may sound foolishness to you, that perhaps never
had a heartache, or that may have all your blessings to come. But now
let me return to my narrative. After about twelve months' interval, and
therefore again in November, but November of the year 1808, I repeated
my visit to Wordsworth, and upon a longer scale. I found him removed
from his cottage to a house of considerable size, about three-quarters
of a mile distant, called Allan Bank. This house had been very recently
erected, at an expense of about £1500, by a gentleman from Liverpool,
a merchant, and also a lawyer in some department or other. It was
not yet completely finished; and an odd accident was reported to
me as having befallen it in its earliest stage. The walls had been
finished, and this event was to be celebrated at the village inn
with an _ovation_, previously to the _triumph_ that would follow on
the roof-raising. The workmen had all housed themselves at the _Red
Lion_, and were beginning their carouse, when up rode a traveller,
who brought them the unseasonable news, that, whilst riding along the
vale, he had beheld the downfall of the whole building. Out the men
rushed, hoping that this might be a hoax; but too surely they found his
report true, and their own festival premature. A little malice mingled
unavoidably with the laughter of the Dalesmen; for it happened that
the Liverpool gentleman had offered a sort of insult to the native
artists, by bringing down both masons and carpenters from his own
town; an unwise plan, for they were necessarily unacquainted with many
points of local skill; and it was to some ignorance in their mode of
laying the stones that the accident was due. The house had one or two
capital defects--it was cold, damp, and, to all appearance, incurably
smoky. Upon this latter defect, by the way, Wordsworth founded a claim,
not for diminution of rent, but absolutely for entire immunity from
any rent at all. It was truly comical to hear him argue the point
with the Liverpool proprietor, Mr. C. He went on dilating on the
hardship of living in such a house; of the injury, or suffering, at
least, sustained by the eyes; until, at last, he had drawn a picture
of himself as a very ill-used man; and I seriously expected to hear
him sum up by demanding a round sum for damages. Mr. C. was a very
good-natured man, calm, and gentlemanlike in his manners. He had also a
considerable respect for Wordsworth, derived, it may be supposed, not
from his writings, but from the authority (which many more besides him
could not resist) of his conversation. However, he looked grave and
perplexed. Nor do I know how the matter ended; but I mention it as an
illustration of Wordsworth's keen spirit of business. Whilst foolish
people supposed him a mere honeyed sentimentalist, speaking only in
zephyrs and bucolics, he was in fact a somewhat hard pursuer of what he
thought fair advantages.

In the February which followed, I left Allan Bank; but, upon Miss
Wordsworth's happening to volunteer the task of furnishing for my use
the cottage so recently occupied by her brother's family, I took it
upon a seven years' lease. And thus it happened--this I mean was the
mode of it (for, at any rate, I should have settled somewhere in the
country)--that I became a resident in Grasmere.

In February, as I have said, of 1809, I quitted Allan Bank; and, from
that time until the depth of summer, Miss Wordsworth was employed in
the task she had volunteered, of renewing and furnishing the little
cottage in which I was to succeed the illustrious tenant who had, in my
mind, hallowed the rooms by a seven years' occupation, during, perhaps,
the happiest period of his life--the early years of his marriage, and
of his first acquaintance with parental affections. Cottage, immortal
in my remembrance! as well it might be; for this cottage I retained
through just seven-and-twenty years: this was the scene of struggle
the most tempestuous and bitter within my own mind: this the scene
of my despondency and unhappiness: this the scene of my happiness--a
happiness which justified the faith of man's _earthly_ lot, as, upon
the whole, a dowry from heaven. It was, in its exterior, not so much
a picturesque cottage--for its outline and proportions, its windows
and its chimneys, were not sufficiently marked and effective for the
picturesque[149]--as it was lovely: one gable end was, indeed, most
gorgeously apparelled in ivy, and so far picturesque; but the principal
side, or what might be called front, as it presented itself to the
road, and was most illuminated by windows, was embossed--nay, it might
be said, smothered--in roses of different species, amongst which the
moss and the damask prevailed. These, together with as much jessamine
and honeysuckle as could find room to flourish, were not only in
themselves a most interesting garniture for a humble cottage wall, but
they also performed the acceptable service of breaking the unpleasant
glare that would else have wounded the eye from the whitewash; a glare
which, having been renewed amongst the general preparations against
my coming to inhabit the house, could not be sufficiently subdued
in tone for the artist's eye until the storm of several winters had
weather-stained and tamed down its brilliancy. The Westmoreland
cottages, as a class, have long been celebrated for their picturesque
forms, and very justly so: in no part of the world are cottages to be
found more strikingly interesting to the eye by their general outlines,
by the sheltered porches of their entrances, by their exquisite
chimneys, by their rustic windows, and by the distribution of the
parts. These parts are on a larger scale, both as to number and size,
than a stranger would expect to find as dependencies and out-houses
attached to dwelling-houses so modest; chiefly from the necessity of
making provision both in fuel for themselves, and in hay, straw, and
brackens for the cattle against the long winter. But, in praising the
Westmoreland dwellings, it must be understood that only those of the
native Dalesmen are contemplated; for, as to those raised by the alien
intruders--"the lakers," or "foreigners" as they are sometimes called
by the old indigenous possessors of the soil--these, being designed
to exhibit "a taste" and an eye for the picturesque, are pretty often
mere models of deformity, as vulgar and as silly as it is well possible
for any object to be in a case where, after all, the workman, and
obedience to custom, and the necessities of the ground, &c., will often
step in to compel the architects into common sense and propriety. The
main defect in Scottish scenery, the eyesore that disfigures so many
charming combinations of landscape, is the offensive style of the rural
architecture; but still, even where it is worst, the _mode_ of its
offence is not by affectation and conceit, and preposterous attempts at
realizing sublime, Gothic, or castellated effects in little gingerbread
ornaments, and "tobacco pipes," and make-believe parapets, and towers
like kitchen or hothouse flues; but in the hard undisguised pursuit of
mere coarse uses and needs of life.

Too often, the rustic mansion, that should speak of decent poverty
and seclusion, peaceful and comfortable, wears the most repulsive
air of town confinement and squalid indigence; the house being built
of substantial stone, three storeys high, or even four, the roof of
massy slate; and everything strong which respects the future outlay
of the proprietor--everything frail which respects the comfort of the
inhabitants: windows broken and stuffed up with rags or old hats;
steps and door encrusted with dirt; and the whole tarnished with
smoke. Poverty--how different the face it wears looking with meagre
staring eyes from such a city dwelling as this, and when it peeps
out, with rosy cheeks, from amongst clustering roses and woodbines,
at a little lattice, from a little one-storey cottage! Are, then, the
main characteristics of the Westmoreland dwelling-houses imputable
to superior taste? By no means. Spite of all that I have heard Mr.
Wordsworth and others say in maintaining that opinion, I, for my
part, do and must hold, that the Dalesmen produce none of the happy
effects which frequently arise in their domestic architecture under
any search after beautiful forms, a search which they despise with a
sort of Vandal dignity; no, nor with any sense or consciousness of
their success. How then? Is it accident--mere casual good luck--that
has brought forth, for instance, so many exquisite forms of chimneys?
Not so; but it is this: it is good sense, on the one hand, bending and
conforming to the dictates or even the suggestions of the climate,
and the local circumstances of rocks, water, currents of air, &c.;
and, on the other hand, wealth sufficient to arm the builder with
all suitable means for giving effect to his purpose, and to evade
the necessity of make-shifts. But the radical ground of the interest
attached to Westmoreland cottage architecture lies in its submission
to the determining agencies of the surrounding circumstances; such
of them, I mean, as are permanent, and have been gathered from long
experience. The porch, for instance, which does so much to take away
from a house the character of a rude box, pierced with holes for air,
light, and ingress, has evidently been dictated by the sudden rushes of
wind through the mountain "ghylls," which make some kind of protection
necessary to the ordinary door; and this reason has been strengthened,
in cases of houses near to a road, by the hospitable wish to provide a
sheltered seat for the wayfarer; most of these porches being furnished
with one in each of the two recesses, to the right and to the left.

The long winter, again, as I have already said, and the artificial
prolongation of the winter by the necessity of keeping the sheep
long upon the low grounds, creates a call for large out-houses; and
these, for the sake of warmth, are usually placed at right angles to
the house; which has the effect of making a much larger system of
parts than would else arise. But perhaps the main feature which gives
character to the pile of building, is the roof, and, above all, the
chimneys. It is the remark of an accomplished Edinburgh artist, H.
W. Williams, in the course of his strictures[150] upon the domestic
architecture of the Italians, and especially of the Florentines,
that the character of buildings, in certain circumstances, "depends
wholly or chiefly on the form of the roof and the chimney. This," he
goes on, "is particularly the case in Italy, where more variety and
taste is displayed in the chimneys than in the buildings to which
they belong. These chimneys are as peculiar and characteristic as
palm trees in a tropical climate." Again, in speaking of Calabria
and the Ionian Islands, he says--"We were forcibly struck with the
consequence which the beauty of the chimneys imparted to the character
of the whole building." Now, in Great Britain, he complains, with
reason, of the very opposite result: not the plain building ennobled
by the chimney, but the chimney degrading the noble building, and in
Edinburgh especially, where the homely and inelegant appearance of the
chimneys contrasts most disadvantageously and offensively with the
beauty of the buildings which they surmount. Even here, however, he
makes an exception for some of the _old_ buildings, whose chimneys,
he admits, "are very tastefully decorated, and contribute essentially
to the beauty of the general effect." It is probable, therefore, and
many houses of the Elizabethan era confirm it, that a better taste
prevailed, in this point, amongst our ancestors, both Scottish and
English; that this elder fashion travelled, together with many other
usages, from the richer parts of Scotland to the Borders, and thence
to the vales of Westmoreland; where they have continued to prevail,
from their affectionate adhesion to all patriarchal customs. Some,
undoubtedly, of these Westmoreland forms have been dictated by the
necessities of the weather, and the systematic energies of human
skill, from age to age, applied to the very difficult task of training
smoke into obedience, under the peculiar difficulties presented by the
sites of Westmoreland houses. These are chosen, generally speaking,
with the same good sense and regard to domestic comfort, as the primary
consideration (without, however, disdainfully slighting the sentiment,
whatever it were, of peace, of seclusion, of gaiety, of solemnity, the
special "religio loci"), which seems to have guided the choice of those
who founded religious houses.

And here, again, by the way, appears a marked difference between the
Dalesmen and the intrusive gentry--not creditable to the latter. The
native Dalesman, well aware of the fury with which the wind often
gathers and eddies about any eminence, however trifling its elevation,
never thinks of planting his house _there_: whereas the stranger,
singly solicitous about the prospect or the range of lake which his
gilt saloons are to command, chooses his site too often upon points
better fitted for a temple of Eolus than a human dwelling-place; and
he belts his house with balconies and verandas that a mountain gale
often tears away in mockery. The Dalesman, wherever his choice is not
circumscribed, selects a sheltered spot (a _wray_,[151] for instance),
which protects him from the wind altogether, upon one or two quarters,
and on all quarters from its tornado violence: he takes good care, at
the same time, to be within a few feet of a mountain beck: a caution
so little heeded by some of the villa founders that absolutely, in a
country surcharged with water, they have sometimes found themselves
driven, by sheer necessity, to the after-thought of sinking a well. The
very best situation, however, in other respects, may be bad in one,
and sometimes find its very advantages, and the beetling crags which
protect its rear, obstructions the most permanent to the ascent of
smoke; and it is in the contest with these natural baffling repellents
of the smoke, and in the variety of artifices for modifying its
vertical, or for accomplishing its lateral escape, that have arisen
the large and graceful variety of chimney models. My cottage, wanting
this primary feature of elegance in the constituents of Westmoreland
cottage architecture, and wanting also another very interesting feature
of the elder architecture, annually becoming more and more rare,--viz.
the outside gallery (which is sometimes merely of wood, but is much
more striking when provided for in the original construction of the
house, and completely _enfoncé_ in the masonry),--could not rank high
amongst the picturesque houses of the country; those, at least, which
are such by virtue of their architectural form. It was, however,
very irregular in its outline to the rear, by the aid of one little
projecting room, and also of a stable and little barn, in immediate
contact with the dwelling-house. It had, besides, the great advantage
of a varying height: two sides being about fifteen or sixteen feet high
from the exposure of both storeys; whereas the other two, being swathed
about by a little orchard that rose rapidly and unequally towards the
vast mountain range in the rear, exposed only the upper storey; and,
consequently, on those sides the elevation rarely rose beyond seven or
eight feet. All these accidents of irregular form and outline gave to
the house some little pretensions to a picturesque character; whilst
its "separable accidents" (as the logicians say), its bowery roses and
jessamine, clothed it in loveliness--its associations with Wordsworth
crowned it, to my mind, with historical dignity,--and, finally, my own
twenty-seven years' off-and-on connexion with it have, by ties personal
and indestructible, endeared it to my heart so unspeakably beyond all
other houses, that even now I rarely dream through four nights running
that I do not find myself (and others besides) in some one of those
rooms, and, most probably, the last cloudy delirium of approaching
death will re-install me in some chamber of that same humble cottage.
"What a tale," says Foster, the eloquent essayist--"what a tale could
be told by many a room, were the walls endowed with memory and speech!"
or, in the more impassioned expressions of Wordsworth--

     "Ah! what a lesson to a thoughtless man
     -------------- if any gladsome field of earth
     Could render back the sighs to which it hath responded,
     Or echo the sad steps by which it hath been trod!"

And equally affecting it would be, if such a field or such a house
could render up the echoes of joy, of festal music, of jubilant
laughter--the innocent mirth of infants, or the gaiety, not less
innocent, of youthful mothers--equally affecting would be such a
reverberation of forgotten household happiness with the re-echoing
records of sighs and groans. And few indeed are the houses that, within
a period no longer than from the beginning of the century to 1835
(so long was it either mine or Wordsworth's) have crowded such ample
materials for those echoes, whether sorrowful or joyous.

My cottage was ready in the summer; but I was playing truant amongst
the valleys of Somersetshire; and, meantime, different families,
throughout the summer, borrowed the cottage of the Wordsworths as my
friends. They consisted chiefly of ladies; and some, by the delicacy
of their attentions to the flowers, &c., gave me reason to consider
their visit during my absence as a real honour; others--such is the
difference of people in this world--left the rudest memorials of
their careless habits impressed upon house, furniture, garden, &c.
In November, at last, I, the long-expected, made my appearance. Some
little sensation did really and naturally attend my coming, for most
of the draperies belonging to beds, curtains, &c., had been sewed by
the young women of that or the adjoining vales. This had caused me
to be talked of. Many had seen me on my visit to the Wordsworths.
Miss Wordsworth had introduced the curious to a knowledge of my age,
name, prospects, and all the rest of what can be interesting to
know. Even the old people of the vale were a little excited by the
accounts (somewhat exaggerated, perhaps) of the never ending books
that continued to arrive in packing-cases for several months in
succession. Nothing in these vales so much fixes the attention and
respect of the people as the reputation of being a "far learn'd" man.
So far, therefore, I had already bespoke the favourable opinion of
the Dalesmen. And a separate kind of interest arose amongst mothers
and daughters, in the knowledge that I should necessarily want
what--in a sense somewhat different from the general one--is called a
"housekeeper"; that is, not an upper servant to superintend others,
but one who could undertake, in her own person, all the duties of the
house. It is not discreditable to these worthy people that several
of the richest and most respectable families were anxious to secure
the place for a daughter. Had I been a dissipated young man, I have
good reason to know that there would have been no canvassing at all
for the situation. But partly my books spoke for the character of my
pursuits with these simple-minded people--partly the introduction of
the Wordsworths guaranteed the safety of such a service. Even then,
had I persisted in my original intention of bringing a man-servant, no
respectable young woman would have accepted the place. As it was, and
it being understood that I had renounced this intention, many, in a
gentle, diffident way, applied for the place, or their parents on their
behalf. And I mention the fact, because it illustrates one feature in
the manners of this primitive and peculiar people, the Dalesmen of
Westmoreland. However wealthy, they do not think it degrading to permit
even the eldest daughter to go out a few years to service. The object
is not to gain a sum of money in wages, but that sort of household
experience which is supposed to be unattainable upon a suitable scale
out of a gentleman's family. So far was this carried, that, amongst
the offers made to myself, was one from a young woman whose family was
amongst the very oldest in the country, and who was at that time under
an engagement of marriage to the very richest young man in the vale.
She and her future husband had a reasonable prospect of possessing
ten thousand pounds in land; and yet neither her own family nor her
husband's objected to her seeking such a place as I could offer. Her
character and manners, I ought to add, were so truly excellent, and
won respect so inevitably from everybody, that nobody could wonder at
the honourable confidence reposed in her by her manly and spirited
young lover. The issue of the matter, as respected my service, was,
why I do not know, that Miss Wordsworth did not accept of her: and she
fulfilled her purpose in another family, a very grave and respectable
one, in Kendal. She stayed about a couple of years, returned, and
married the young man to whom she had engaged herself, and is now the
prosperous mother of a fine handsome family; and she together with her
mother-in-law are the two leading matrons of the vale.

It was on a November night, about ten o'clock, that I first found
myself installed in a house of my own--this cottage, so memorable from
its past tenant to all men, so memorable to myself from all which
has since passed in connexion with it. A writer in _The Quarterly
Review_, in noticing the autobiography of Dr. Watson, the Bishop of
Llandaff, has thought fit to say that the Lakes, of course, afforded
no society capable of appreciating this commonplace, coarse-minded man
of talents. The person who said this I understand to have been Dr.
Whitaker, the respectable antiquary. Now, that the reader may judge of
the propriety with which this was asserted, I shall slightly rehearse
the muster-roll of our Lake society, as it existed at the time when I
seated myself in my Grasmere cottage. I will undertake to say that the
meanest person in the whole scattered community was more extensively
accomplished than the good bishop, was more conscientiously true to
his duties, and had more varied powers of conversation. Wordsworth and
Coleridge, then living at Allan Bank, in Grasmere, I will not notice
in such a question. Southey, living thirteen miles off, at Keswick,
I have already noticed; and he needs no _proneur_. I will begin with
Windermere.

At Clappersgate, a little hamlet of perhaps six houses, on its
north-west angle, and about five miles from my cottage, resided two
Scottish ladies, daughters of Dr. Cullen, the famous physician and
nosologist.[152] They were universally beloved for their truly kind
dispositions and the firm independence of their conduct They had been
reduced from great affluence to a condition of rigorous poverty. Their
father had made what should have been a fortune by his practice.
The good doctor, however, was careless of his money in proportion
to the facility with which he made it. All was put into a box, open
to the whole family. Breach of confidence, in the most thoughtless
use of this money, there could be none; because no restraint in that
point, beyond what honour and good sense imposed, was laid upon any
of the elder children. Under such regulations, it may be imagined
that Dr. Cullen would not accumulate any very large capital; and,
at his death, the family, for the first time, found themselves in
embarrassed circumstances. Of the two daughters who belonged to our
Lake population, one had married a Mr. Millar, son to the celebrated
Professor Millar of Glasgow.[153] This gentleman had died in America;
and Mrs. Millar was now a childless widow. The other still remained
unmarried. Both were equally independent; and independent even with
regard to their nearest relatives; for, even from their brother--who
had risen to rank and affluence as a Scottish judge, under the title
of Lord Cullen[154]--they declined to receive assistance; and except
for some small addition made to their income by a novel called "Home"
(in as many as seven volumes, I really believe) by Miss Cullen,
their expenditure was rigorously shaped to meet that very slender
income which they drew from _their_ shares of the patrimonial wrecks.
More honourable and modest independence, or poverty more gracefully
supported, I have rarely known.

Meantime, these ladies, though literary and very agreeable in
conversation, could not be classed with what now began to be known
as the _lake_ community of literati; for they took no interest in
any one of the lake poets; did not affect to take any; and I am sure
they were not aware of so much value in any one thing these poets had
written as could make it worth while even to look into their books;
and accordingly, as well-bred women, they took the same course as was
pursued for several years by Mrs. Hannah More, viz. cautiously to avoid
mentioning their names in my presence. This was natural enough in
women who had probably built their early admiration upon French models
(for Mrs. Millar used to tell me that she regarded the "Mahomet" of
Voltaire as the most perfect of human compositions), and still more so
at a period when almost all the world had surrendered their opinions
and their literary consciences (so to speak) into the keeping of _The
Edinburgh Review_; in whose favour, besides, those ladies had the
pardonable prepossessions of national pride, as a collateral guarantee
of that implicit faith which, in those days, stronger-minded people
than they took a pride in professing. Still, in defiance of prejudices
mustering so strongly to support their blindness, and the still
stronger support which this blindness drew from their total ignorance
of everything either done or attempted by the lake poets, these amiable
women persisted in one uniform tone of courteous forbearance, as often
as any question arose to implicate the names either of Wordsworth or
Coleridge,--any question about them, their books, their families, or
anything that was theirs. They thought it strange, indeed (for so
much I heard by a circuitous course), that promising and intellectual
young men--men educated at great Universities, such as Mr. Wilson of
Elleray, or myself, or a few others who had paid us visits,--should
possess so deep a veneration for these writers; but evidently this was
an infatuation--a craze, originating, perhaps, in personal connexions,
and, as the craze of valued friends, to be treated with tenderness. For
us therefore--for our sakes--they took a religious care to suppress
all allusion to these disreputable names; and it is pretty plain
how sincere their indifference must have been with regard to these
neighbouring authors, from the evidence of one fact, viz. that when, in
1810, Mr. Coleridge began to issue, in weekly numbers, his _Friend_,
which, by the prospectus, held forth a promise of meeting all possible
tastes--literary, philosophic, political--even this comprehensive
field of interest, combined with the adventitious attraction (so very
unusual, and so little to have been looked for in that thinly-peopled
region) of a local origin, from the bosom of those very hills at the
foot of which (though on a different side) they were themselves living,
failed altogether to stimulate their torpid curiosity; so perfect was
their persuasion beforehand that no good thing could by possibility
come out of a community that had fallen under the ban of the Edinburgh
critics.

At the same time, it is melancholy to confess that, partly from the
dejection of Coleridge, his constant immersion in opium at that
period, his hatred of the duties he had assumed, or at least of their
too frequent and periodical recurrence, and partly also from the bad
selection of topics for a miscellaneous audience, from the heaviness
and obscurity with which they were treated, and from the total want
of variety, in consequence of defective arrangements on his part
for ensuring the co-operation of his friends, no conceivable act
of authorship that Coleridge _could_ have perpetrated, no possible
overt act of dulness and somnolent darkness that he _could_ have
authorized, was so well fitted to sustain the impression, with
regard to him and his friends, that had pre-occupied these ladies'
minds. _Habes confitentem reum!_ I am sure they would exclaim; not
perhaps confessing to that form of delinquency which they had been
taught to expect--trivial or extravagant sentimentalism, _Germanity_
alternating with tumid inanity; not this, but something quite as
bad or worse, viz. palpable dulness--dulness that could be felt and
handled--rayless obscurity as to the thoughts--and communicated in
language that, according to the Bishop of Llandaff's complaint, was not
always English. For, though the particular words cited for blame were
certainly known to the vocabulary of metaphysics, and had even been
employed by a writer of Queen Anne's reign (Leibnitz), who, if any,
had the gift of translating dark thoughts into plain ones--still it
was intolerable, in point of good sense, that one who had to win his
way into the public ear should begin by bringing before a popular and
miscellaneous audience themes that could require such startling and
revolting words. _The Delphic Oracle_ was the kindest of the nicknames
which the literary taste of Windermere conferred upon the new journal.
This was the laughing suggestion of a clever young lady, a daughter of
the Bishop of Llandaff, who stood in a neutral position with regard to
Coleridge. But others there were amongst his supposed friends who felt
even more keenly than this young lady the shocking want of adaptation
to his audience in the choice of matter, and, even to an audience
better qualified to meet such matter, the want of adaptation in the
mode of publication,--viz. periodically, and by weekly recurrence;
a mode of soliciting the public attention which even authorizes the
expectation of current topics--topics arising each with its own week or
day. One in particular I remember of these disapproving friends: a Mr.
Blair, an accomplished scholar, and a frequent visitor at Elleray,[155]
who started the playful scheme of a satirical rejoinder to Coleridge's
_Friend_, under the name of _The Enemy_, which was to follow always in
the wake of its leader, and to stimulate Coleridge (at the same time
that it amused the public) by attic banter, or by downright opposition
and showing fight in good earnest. It was a plan that might have done
good service to the world, and chiefly through a seasonable irritation
(never so much wanted as then) applied to Coleridge's too lethargic
state: in fact, throughout life, it is most deeply to be regretted
that Coleridge's powers and peculiar learning were never forced out
into a large display by intense and almost persecuting opposition.
However, this scheme, like thousands of other day-dreams and bubbles
that rose upon the breath of morning spirits and buoyant youth, fell
to the ground; and, in the meantime, no enemy to _The Friend_ appeared
that was capable of matching _The Friend_ when left to itself and
its own careless or vagrant guidance. _The Friend_ ploughed heavily
along for nine-and-twenty numbers[156]; and our fair recusants and
non-conformists in all that regarded the lake poetry or authorship,
the two Scottish ladies of Clappersgate, found no reasons for changing
their opinions; but continued, for the rest of my acquaintance with
them, to practise the same courteous and indulgent silence, whenever
the names of Coleridge or Wordsworth happened to be mentioned.

In taking leave of these Scottish ladies, it may be interesting to
mention that, previously to their final farewell to our Lake society,
upon taking up their permanent residence in York (which step they
adopted partly, I believe, to enjoy the more diversified society which
that great city yields, and, at any rate, the more _accessible_
society than amongst mountain districts--partly with a view to the
cheapness of that rich district in comparison with our sterile soil,
poor towns, and poor agriculture) somewhere about the May or June of
1810, I think--they were able, by a long preparatory course of economy,
to invite to the English lakes a family of foreigners--what shall I
call them?--a family of Anglo-Gallo-Americans, from the Carolinas. The
invitation had been of old standing, and offered, as an expression
of gratitude, from these ladies, for many hospitalities and friendly
services rendered by the two heads of that family to Mrs. Millar,
in former years, and under circumstances of peculiar trial. Mrs.
Millar had been hastily summoned from Scotland to attend her husband
at Charleston; him, on her arrival, she found dying; and, whilst
overwhelmed by this sudden blow, it may be imagined that the young
widow would find trials enough for her fortitude, without needing any
addition to the load from friendlessness amongst a nation of strangers
and from total solitude. These evils were spared to Mrs. Millar,
through the kind offices and disinterested exertions of an American
gentleman (French by birth, but American by adoption), M. Simond, who
took upon himself the cares of superintending Mr. Millar's funeral
through all its details, and, by this most seasonable service, secured
to the heart-stricken widow that most welcome of privileges in all
situations, the privilege of unmolested privacy; for assuredly the
heaviest aggravation of such bereavements lies in the necessity,--too
often imposed by circumstances upon him or upon her who may happen
to be the sole responsible representative, and, at the same time,
the dearest friend of the deceased,--of superintending the funeral
arrangements. In the very agonies of a new-born grief, whilst the
heart is yet raw and bleeding, the mind not yet able to comprehend its
loss, the very light of day hateful to the eyes, the necessity even at
such a moment arises, and without a day's delay, of facing strangers,
talking with strangers, discussing the most empty details with a view
to the most sordid of considerations--cheapness, convenience, custom,
and local prejudice--and, finally, talking about whom? why, the very
child, husband, wife, who has just been torn away; and this, too,
under a consciousness that the being so hallowed is, as to these
strangers, an object equally indifferent with any one person whatsoever
that died a thousand years ago. Fortunate, indeed, is that person who
has a natural friend, or, in default of such a friend, who finds a
volunteer stepping forward to relieve him from a conflict of feeling
so peculiarly unseasonable. Mrs. Millar never forgot the service which
had been rendered to her; and she was happy when M. Simond, who had
become a wealthy citizen of America, at length held out the prospect of
coming to profit by her hospitable attentions amongst that circle of
friends with whom she and her sister had surrounded themselves in so
interesting a part of England.

M. Simond had been a French emigrant; not, I believe, so far connected
with the privileged orders of his country, or with any political party,
as to be absolutely forced out of France by danger or by panic; but he
had shared in the feelings of those who were. Revolutionary France,
in the anarchy of the transition state, and still heaving to and fro
with the subsiding shocks of the great earthquake, did not suit him:
there was neither the polish which he sought in its manners, nor the
security which he sought in its institutions. England he did not love;
but yet, if not England, some country which had grown up from English
foundations was the country for him; and, as he augured no rest for
France through some generations to come, but an endless succession of
revolution to revolution, anarchy to anarchy, he judged it best that,
having expatriated himself and lost one country, he should solemnly
adopt another. Accordingly he became an American citizen. English he
already spoke with propriety and fluency. And, finally, he cemented
his English connexions by marrying an English lady, the niece of John
Wilkes. "What John Wilkes?" asked a lady, one of a dinner-party at
Calgarth (the house of Dr. Watson, the celebrated Bishop of Llandaff,
upon the banks of Windermere).--"_What_ John Wilkes?" re-echoed the
Bishop, with a vehement intonation of scorn; "_What_ John Wilkes,
indeed! as if there was ever more than one John Wilkes--_fama super
æthera notus_!"--"O, my Lord, I beg your pardon," said an old lady,
nearly connected with the Bishop, "there were two; I knew one of
them: he was a little, ill-looking man, and he kept the Blue Boar
at----."--"At Flamborough Head!" roared the Bishop, with a savage
expression of disgust. The old lady, suspecting that some screw was
loose in the matter, thought it prudent to drop the contest; but she
murmured, _sotto voce_, "No, not at Flamborough Head, but at Market
Drayton." Madame Simond, then, was the niece, not of the ill-looking
host of the Blue Boar, but of _the_ Wilkes so memorably connected with
the _parvanimities_ of the English government at one period; with the
casuistry of our English constitution, by the questions raised in his
person as to the effects of expulsion from the House of Commons, &c.
&c.; and, finally, with the history of English jurisprudence, by his
intrepidity on the matter of general warrants. M. Simond's party, when
at length it arrived, consisted of two persons besides himself, viz.
his wife, the niece of Wilkes, and a young lady of eighteen, standing
in the relation of grand-niece to the same memorable person. This young
lady, highly pleasing in her person, on quitting the lake district,
went northwards with her party, to Edinburgh, and there became
acquainted with Mr. Francis Jeffrey, the present Lord Jeffrey [1840],
who naturally enough fell in love with her, followed her across the
Atlantic, and in Charleston, I believe, received the honour of her hand
in marriage.

I, as one of Mrs. Millar's friends, put in my claim to entertain her
American party in my turn. One long summer's day, they all came over
to my cottage in Grasmere; and, as it became my duty to do the honours
of our vale to the strangers, I thought that I could not discharge the
duty in a way more likely to interest them all than by conducting them
through Grasmere into the little inner chamber of Easedale, and there,
within sight of the solitary cottage, Blentarn Ghyll, telling them the
story of the Greens[158]; because, in this way, I had an opportunity,
at the same time, of showing the scenery from some of the best points,
and of opening to them a few glimpses of the character and customs
which distinguish this section of the English yeomanry from others.
The story did certainly interest them all; and thus far I succeeded
in my duties as Cicerone and Amphytrion of the day. But, throughout
the rest of our long morning's ramble, I remember that accident, or,
possibly the politeness of M. Simond, and his French sympathy with a
young man's natural desire to stand well in the eyes of a handsome
young woman, so ordered it that I had constantly the honour of being
Miss Wilkes's immediate companion, as the narrowness of the path pretty
generally threw us into ranks of two and two. Having, therefore,
through so many hours, the opportunity of an exclusive conversation
with this young lady, it would have been my own fault had I failed to
carry off an impression of her great good sense, as well as her amiable
and spirited character. Certainly I did _mon possible_ to entertain
her, both on her own account and as the visitor of my Scottish friends.
But, in the midst of all my efforts, I had the mortification to feel
that I was rowing against the stream; that there was a silent body
of prepossession against the whole camp of the lakers, which nothing
could unsettle. Miss Wilkes naturally looked up, with some feelings of
respect, to M. Simond, who, by his marriage with her aunt, had become
her own guardian and protector. Now, M. Simond, of all the men in the
world, was the last who could have appreciated an English poet. He
had, to begin with, a French inaptitude for apprehending poetry at
all: any poetry, that is, which transcends manners and the interests
of social life. Then, unfortunately, not merely through what he had
not, but equally through what he had, this cleverish Frenchman was, by
whole diameters of the earth, remote from the station at which he could
comprehend Wordsworth. He was a thorough, knowing man of the world,
keen, sharp as a razor, and valuing nothing but the tangible and the
ponderable. He had a smattering of mechanics, of physiology, geology,
mineralogy, and all other _ologies_ whatsoever; he had, besides, at his
fingers' ends, a huge body of statistical facts--how many people did
live, could live, ought to live, in each particular district of each
manufacturing county; how many old women of eighty-three there ought
to be to so many little children of one; how many murders ought to be
committed in a month by each town of five thousand souls; and so on
_ad infinitum_. And to such a thin shred had his old French politeness
been worn down by American attrition, that his thin lips could with
much ado contrive to disguise his contempt for those who failed to
meet him exactly upon his own field, with exactly his own quality of
knowledge. Yet, after all, it was but a little _case_ of knowledge,
that he had packed up neatly for a make-shift; just what corresponds
to the little assortment of razors, tooth-brushes, nail-brushes,
hair-brushes, cork-screw, gimlet, &c. &c., which one carries in one's
trunk, in a red Morocco case, to meet the casualties of a journey. The
more one was indignant at being the object of such a man's contempt,
the more heartily did one disdain his disdain, and recalcitrate his
kicks.

On the single day which Mrs. Millar could spare for Grasmere, I had
taken care to ask Wordsworth amongst those who were to meet the party.
Wordsworth came; but, by instinct, he and Monsieur Simond knew and
recoiled from each other. They met, they saw, they _inter-despised_.
Wordsworth, on his side, seemed so heartily to despise M. Simond
that he did not stir or make an effort to right himself under any
misapprehension of the Frenchman, but coolly acquiesced in any and
every inference which he might be pleased to draw; whilst M. Simond,
double-charged with contempt from _The Edinburgh Review_, and from the
report (I cannot doubt) of his present hostess, manifestly thought
Wordsworth too abject almost for the trouble of too openly disdaining
him. More than one of us could have done justice on this malefactor
by meeting M. Simond on his own ground, and taking the conceit out of
him most thoroughly. I was one of those; for I had the very knowledge,
or some of it, that he most paraded. But one of us was lazy; another
thought it not _tanti_; and I, for my part, in my own house, could not
move upon such a service. And in those days, moreover, when as yet I
loved Wordsworth not less than I venerated him, a success that would
have made him suffer in any man's opinion by comparison with myself
would have been painful to my feelings. Never did party meet more
exquisitely ill-assorted; never did party separate with more exquisite
and cordial disgust in its principal members towards each other. I
mention the case at all, in order to illustrate the abject condition of
worldly opinion in which Wordsworth then lived. Perhaps his ill fame
was just then in its meridian; for M. Simond, soon after, published
his English Tour in two octavo volumes; and, of course, he goes over
his residence at the Lakes; yet it is a strong fact that, according
to my remembrance, he does not vouchsafe to mention such a person as
Wordsworth.

One anecdote, before parting with these ladies, I will mention, as
received from Miss Cullen on her personal knowledge of the fact. There
are stories current which resemble this, but wanting that immediate
guarantee for their accuracy which, in this case, I at least was
obliged to admit, in the attestation of so perfectly veracious a
reporter as this excellent lady. A female friend of her own, a person
of family and consideration, being on the eve of undertaking a visit
to a remote part of the kingdom, dreamed that, on reaching the end of
her journey, and drawing up to the steps of the door, a footman, with
a very marked and forbidding expression of countenance, his complexion
pale and bloodless, and his manners sullen, presented himself to let
down the steps of her carriage. This same man, at a subsequent point
of her dream, appeared to be stealing up a private staircase, with
some murderous instruments in his hands, towards a bed-room door.
This dream was repeated, I think, twice. Some time after, the lady,
accompanied by a grown-up daughter, accomplished her journey. Great was
the shock which awaited her on reaching her friend's house: a servant
corresponding in all points to the shadowy outline of her dream,
equally bloodless in complexion, and equally gloomy in manner, appeared
at her carriage door. The issue of the story was that upon a particular
night, after a stay of some length, the lady grew unaccountably
nervous; resisted her feelings for some time; but at length, at the
entreaty of her daughter, who slept in the same room, suffered some
communication of the case to be made to a gentleman resident in
the house, who had not yet retired to rest. This gentleman, struck
by the dream, and still more on recalling to mind some suspicious
preparations, as if for a hasty departure, in which he had detected the
servant, waited in concealment until three o'clock in the morning--at
which time, hearing a stealthy step moving up the staircase, he issued
with firearms, and met the man at the lady's door, so equipped as to
leave no doubt of his intentions; which possibly contemplated only
robbing of the lady's jewels, but possibly also murder in a case of
extremity. There are other stories with some of the same circumstances;
and, in particular, I remember one very like it in Dr. Abercrombie's
"Inquiries Concerning the Intellectual Powers" [1830], p. 283. But in
this version of Dr. Abercrombie's (supposing it another version of the
same story) the striking circumstance of anticipating the servant's
features is omitted; and in no version, except this of Miss Cullen's,
have I heard the names mentioned both of the parties to the affair, and
also of the place at which it occurred.

Immediately below the little village of Clappersgate, in which the
Scottish ladies resided--Mrs. Millar and Mrs. Cullen--runs the wild
mountain river called the _Brathay_, which, descending from Langdale
Head, and soon after becoming confluent with the Rothay (a brook-like
stream that comes originally from Easedale, and takes its course
through the two lakes of Grasmere and Rydal), finally composes
a considerable body of water, that flows along, deep, calm, and
steady--no longer brawling, bubbling, tumultuous--into the splendid
lake of Windermere, the largest of our English waters, or, if not, at
least the longest, and of the most extensive circuit. Close to this
little river, Brathay, on the farther side as regards Clappersgate
(and what, though actually part and parcel of a district that is
severed by the sea, or by Westmoreland, from Lancashire proper, is
yet, from some old legal usage, denominated the Lancashire side of the
Brathay), stands a modest family mansion, called Low Brathay, by way
of distinction from another and a larger mansion, about a quarter of a
mile beyond it, which, standing upon a little eminence, is called High
Brathay.

In this house of Low Brathay lived, and continued to live, for
many years (in fact, until misery, in its sharpest form, drove him
from his hearth and his household happiness), Charles L---- the
younger[160];--on his own account, and for his personal qualities,
worthy of a separate notice in any biography, howsoever sparing in its
digressions; but, viewed in reference to his fortunes, amongst the most
interesting men I have known. Never do I reflect upon his hard fate,
and the bitter though mysterious persecution of body which pursued
him, dogged him, and thickened as life advanced, but I feel gratitude
to Heaven for my own exemption from suffering in that particular
form; and, in the midst of afflictions, of which two or three have
been most hard to bear,--because not unmingled with pangs of remorse
for the share which I myself may have had in causing them,--still, by
comparison with the lot of Charles Lloyd, I acknowledge my own to have
been happy and serene. Already, on my first hasty visit to Grasmere in
1807, I found Charles Lloyd settled with his family at Brathay, and a
resident there, I believe, of some standing. It was on a wet gloomy
evening; and Miss Wordsworth and I were returning from an excursion to
Esthwaite Water, when, suddenly, in the midst of blinding rain, without
previous notice, she said--Pray, let us call for a few minutes at this
house. A garden gate led us into a little shrubbery, chiefly composed
of lawns, beautifully kept, through which ran a gravel road, just wide
enough to admit a single carriage. A minute or so saw us housed in a
small comfortable drawing-room, but with no signs of living creatures
near it; and, from the accident of double doors, all covered with
baize, being scattered about the house, the whole mansion seemed the
palace of silence, though populous, I understood, with children. In no
long time appeared Mr. Lloyd, soon followed by his youthful wife, both
radiant with kindness; and it may be supposed that we were not suffered
to depart for some hours. I call Mrs. Lloyd youthful; and so I might
call her husband; for both were youthful, considered as the parents of
a numerous family, six or seven children then living--Charles Lloyd
himself not being certainly more than twenty-seven, and his "Sophia"
perhaps not twenty-five.

On that short visit I saw enough to interest me in both; and, two
years after, when I became myself a permanent resident in Grasmere,
the connexion between us became close and intimate. My cottage stood
just five miles from Brathay; and there were two mountain roads which
shortened the space between us, though not the time nor the toil.
But, notwithstanding this distance, often and often, upon the darkest
nights, for many years, I used to go over about nine o'clock, or an
hour later, and sit with him till one. Mrs. Lloyd was simply an amiable
young woman, of pleasing person, perfectly well principled, and, as a
wife and mother, not surpassed by anybody I have known in either of
those characters. In figure she somewhat resembled the ever memorable
and most excellent Mrs. Jordan; she was exactly of the middle height
and having that slight degree of _embonpoint_, even in youth, which
never through life diminishes or increases. Her complexion may be
imagined from the circumstance of her hair being tinged with a slight
and not unpleasing shade of red. Finally, in manners she was remarkably
self-possessed, free from all awkward embarrassment, and (to an extent
which some people would wonder at in one who had been brought up, I
believe, wholly in a great commercial town) perfectly lady-like. So
much description is due to one who, though no authoress, and never
making the slightest pretension to talents, was too much connected
subsequently with the lakers to be passed over in a review of their
community. Ah! gentle lady! your head, after struggling through many
a year with strange calamities, has found rest at length; but not in
English ground, or amongst the mountains which you loved: at Versailles
it is, and perhaps within a stone's throw of that Mrs. Jordan whom
in so many things you resembled, and most of all in the misery which
settled upon your latter years. There you lie, and for ever, whose
blooming matronly figure rises up to me at this moment from a depth of
thirty years! and your children scattered into all lands!

But for Charles Lloyd: he, by his literary works, is so far known
to the public, that, on his own account, he merits some separate
notice.[161] His poems do not place him in the class of powerful poets;
they are loosely conceived--faultily even at times--and not finished
in the execution. But they have a real and a mournful merit under
one aspect, which might be so presented to the general reader as to
win a peculiar interest for many of them, and for some a permanent
place in any judicious _thesaurus_--such as we may some day hope to
see drawn off, and carefully filtered, from the enormous mass of
poetry produced since the awakening era of the French Revolution.
This aspect is founded on the relation which they bear to the real
events and the unexaggerated afflictions of his own life. The feelings
which he attempts to express were not assumed for effect, nor drawn
by suggestion from others, and then transplanted into some ideal
experience of his own. They do not belong to the mimetic poetry so
extensively cultivated; but they were true solitary sighs, wrung from
his own meditative heart by excess of suffering, and by the yearning
after old scenes and household faces of an impassioned memory, brooding
over vanished happiness, and cleaving to those early times when life
wore even for _his_ eyes the golden light of Paradise. But he had other
and higher accomplishments of intellect than he showed in his verses,
as I shall presently explain; and of a nature which make it difficult
to bring them adequately within the reader's apprehension.

Meantime, I will sketch an outline of poor Lloyd's history, so far as
I can pretend to know it. He was the son, and probably his calamitous
life originally dated from his being the son, of Quaker parents. It was
said, indeed, by himself as well as others, that the mysterious malady
which haunted him had been derived from an ancestress in the maternal
line; and this may have been true; and, for all that, it may also be
true that Quaker habits were originally answerable for this legacy of
woe. It is sufficiently well known that, in the training of their young
people, the Society of Friends make it a point of conscience to apply
severe checks to all open manifestations of natural feeling, or of
exuberant spirits. Not the passions--they are beyond their control--but
the expression of those passions by any natural language; this they
lay under the heaviest restraint; and, in many cases, it is possible
that such a system of thwarting nature may do no great mischief; just
as we see the American Indians, in moulding the plastic skulls of
their infants into capricious shapes, do not, after all, much disturb
the ordinary course of nature, nor produce the idiots we might have
expected. But, then, the reason why such tampering may often terminate
in slight results is, because often there is not much to tamper with;
the machinery is so slight, and the total range within which it plays
is perhaps so narrow, that the difference between its normal action and
its widest deviation may, after all, be practically unimportant. For
there are many men and women of whom I have already said, borrowing the
model of the word from Hartley, that they have not so much passions
as _passiuncles_. These, however, are in _one_ extreme; and others
there are and will be, in every class, and under every disadvantage,
who are destined to illustrate the very opposite extreme. Great
passions--passions pointing to the paths of love, of ambition, of
glory, martial or literary--these in men--and in women, again, these,
either in some direct shape, or taking the form of intense sympathy
with the same passions as moving amongst contemporary men--_will_ gleam
out fitfully amongst the placid children of Fox and Penn, not less than
amongst us who profess no war with the nobler impulses of our nature.
And, perhaps, according to the Grecian doctrine of _antiperistasis_,
strong untameable passions are more likely to arise even in consequence
of the counteraction. Deep passions undoubtedly lie in the blood and
constitution of Englishmen; and Quakers,[162] after all, do not, by
being such, cease, therefore, to be Englishmen.

It is, I have said, sufficiently well known that the Quakers make it a
point of their moral economy to lay the severest restraints upon all
ebullitions of feeling. Whatever may be the nature of the feeling,
whatever its strength, utter itself by word or by gesture it must not;
smoulder it may, but it must not break into a flame. This is known; but
it is not equally known that this unnatural restraint, falling into
collision with two forces at once, the force of passion and of youth,
not uncommonly records its own injurious tendencies, and publishes the
rebellious movements of nature, by distinct and anomalous diseases.
And further, I have been assured, upon most excellent authority,
that these diseases, strange and elaborate affections of the nervous
system, are found _exclusively_ amongst the young men and women of the
Quaker society; that they are known and understood exclusively amongst
physicians who have practised in great towns having a large Quaker
population, such as Birmingham; that they assume a new type, and a more
inveterate character, in the second or third generation, to whom this
fatal inheritance is often transmitted; and finally, that, if this
class of nervous derangements does not increase so much as to attract
public attention, it is simply because the community itself--the Quaker
body--does not increase, but, on the contrary, is rather on the wane.

From a progenitrix, then, no matter in what generation, C. Lloyd
inherited that awful malady which withered his own happiness, root
and branch, gathering strength from year to year. His father was a
banker, and, I presume, wealthy, from the ample allowance which he
always made to his son Charles. Charles, it is true, had the rights
of primogeniture--which, however, in a commercial family, are not
considerable--but, at the same time, though eldest, he was eldest of
seventeen or eighteen brothers and sisters, and of these I believe
that some round dozen or so were living at the time when I first came
to know him. He had been educated in the bosom of Quaker society; his
own parents, with most of their friends, were Quakers; and, even of
his own generation, all the young women continued Quakers. Naturally,
therefore, as a boy, he also was obliged to conform to the Quaker
ritual. But this ritual presses with great inequality upon the two
sexes; in so far, at least, as regards dress. The distinctions of
dress which announce the female Quaker are all in her favour. In a
nation eminent for personal purity, and where it should seem beforehand
impossible for any woman to create a pre-eminence for herself in that
respect, so it is, however, that the female Quaker, by her dress,
seems even purer than other women, and consecrated to a service of
purity; earthly soil or taint, even the sullying breath of mortality,
seems as if kept aloof from her person--forcibly held in repulsion by
some protecting sanctity. This transcendent purity, and a nun-like
gentleness, self-respect, and sequestration from the world--these are
all that _her_ peculiarity of dress expresses; and surely this "all" is
quite enough to win every man's favourable feelings towards her, and
something even like homage. But, with the male Quaker, how different
is the case! _His_ dress--originally not remarkable by its shape, but
solely by its colour and want of ornament, so peculiar has it become
in a lapse of nearly two centuries--seems expressly devised to point
him out to ridicule. In some towns, it is true, such as Birmingham and
Kendal, the public eye is so familiar with this costume, that in _them_
it excites no feeling whatever more than the professional costume of
butchers, bakers, grooms, &c. But in towns not commercial--towns of
luxury and parade--a Quaker is exposed to most mortifying trials of his
self-esteem. It has happened that I have followed a young man of this
order for a quarter of a mile, in Bath, or in one of the fashionable
streets of London, on a summer evening, when numerous servants were
lounging on the steps of the front door, or at the area gates; and I
have seen him run the gauntlet of grim smiles from the men, and _heard_
him run the gauntlet of that sound--the worst which heaven has in its
artillery of scorn against the peace of poor man--the half-suppressed
titter of the women. Laughing outright is bad, but still _that_ may be
construed into a determinate insult that studiously avows more contempt
than is really felt; but tittering is hell itself; for it seems mere
nature, and absolute truth, that extort this expression of contempt in
spite of every effort to suppress it.

Some such expression it was that drove Charles Lloyd into an early
apostasy from his sect: early it must have been, for he went at the
usual age of eighteen to Cambridge, and there, as a Quaker, he could
not have been received. He, indeed, of all men, was the least fitted
to contend with the world's scorn, for he had no great fortitude of
mind; his vocation was not to martyrdom, and he was cursed with the
most exquisite sensibility. This sensibility, indeed, it was, and not
so properly any determinate passion, which had been the scourge of his
ancestors. There was something that appeared effeminate about it; and
which, accordingly, used to provoke the ridicule of Wordsworth, whose
character, in all its features, wore a masculine and Roman harshness.
But, in fact, when you came to know Charles Lloyd, there was, even
in this slight tinge of effeminacy, something which conciliated your
pity by the feeling that it impressed you with, of being part of his
disease. His sensibility was eminently _Rousseauish_--that is, it was
physico-moral; now pointing to appetites that would have mastered him
had he been less intellectual and governed by a less exalted standard
of moral perceptions; now pointing to fine aerial speculations,
subtle as a gossamer, and apparently calculated to lead him off into
abstractions even too remote from flesh and blood.

During the Cambridge vacation, or, it might be, even before he went
to Cambridge--and my reason for thinking so is because both, I
believe, belonged to the same town, if it could not be said of them
as of Pyramus and Thisbe, that "_contiguas habuere domos_"--he fell
desperately in love with Miss Sophia P----n. Who she was I never
heard--that is, what were her connexions; but I presume that she must
have been of an opulent family, because Mrs. P----n, the mother of
Mrs. Lloyd, occasionally paid a visit to her daughter at the lakes,
and then she brought with her a handsomely-appointed equipage, as to
horses and servants. This I have reason to remember from the fact of
herself and her daughter frequently coming over on summer evenings
to drink tea with me, and the affront (as I then thought it) which
Wordsworth fastened upon me in connexion with one of those visits. One
evening,[163] * * * * * A pang of wrath gathered at my heart. Yet why?
One moment, I felt, indeed, that it was not gentlemanly to interfere
with the privileges of any man standing in the situation which I then
occupied, of host; but still I should not have regarded it, except from
its connexion with a case I recollected in a previous year. One fine
summer day, we were walking together--Wordsworth, myself, and Southey.
Southey had been making earnest inquiries about poor Lloyd, just then
in the crisis of some severe illness, and Wordsworth's answer had been
partly lost to me. I put a question upon it, when, to my surprise (my
wrath internally, but also to my special amusement), he replied that,
in fact, what he had said was a matter of some delicacy, and not quite
proper to be communicated except to _near friends of the family_. This
to me!--O ye gods!--to me, who knew by many a hundred conversations
how disagreeable Wordsworth was both to Charles Lloyd and to his
wife; whilst, on the other hand--not by words only, but by deeds, and
by the most delicate acts of confidential favour--I knew that Mr.
Wilson (Professor Wilson) and myself had been selected as friends in
cases which were not so much as named to Wordsworth. The arrogance of
Wordsworth was well illustrated in this case of the Lloyds.

Having thus, by proxy, run away with his young wife, and married her,
Lloyd brought her to Cambridge. It is a novel thing in Cambridge,
though not altogether unprecedented, for a student to live there with
a wife. This novelty Lloyd exhibited to the University for some time;
but then, finding the situation not perfectly agreeable to the delicate
sensibilities of his young wife, Lloyd removed, first, I think, to
Penrith; and, after some changes, he settled down at Brathay, from
which, so long as he stayed on English ground--that is, for about
fifteen or sixteen years--he never moved. When I first crossed his
path at the Lakes, he was in the zenith of the brief happiness that
was granted to him on earth. He stood in the very centre of earthly
pleasures; and, that his advantages may be easily estimated, I will
describe both himself and his situation.

First, then, as to his person: he was tall and somewhat clumsy--not
intellectual so much as benign and conciliatory in his expression
of face. His features were not striking, but they expressed great
goodness of heart; and latterly wore a deprecatory expression that
was peculiarly touching to those who knew its cause. His manners were
free from all modes of vulgarity; and where he acquired his knowledge
I know not (for I never heard him claim any connexion with people of
rank), but a knowledge he certainly had of all the conventional usages
amongst the higher circles, and of those purely arbitrary customs
which mere good sense and native elegance of manner are not, of
themselves, sufficient to teach. Some of these he might have learned
from the family of the Bishop of Llandaff; for with the ladies of that
family he was intimate, especially with the eldest daughter, who was
an accomplished student in that very department of literature which
Lloyd himself most cultivated, viz. all that class of works which
deal in the analysis of human passions, or attempt to exhibit the
development of human character, in relation to sexual attachments,
when placed in trying circumstances. Lloyd corresponded with Miss
Watson in French; the letters, on both sides, being full of spirit and
originality; the subjects generally drawn from Rousseau's "Heloise"
or his "Confessions," from "Corinne," from "Delphine," or some other
work of Madame de Stael. For such disquisitions Lloyd had a real and a
powerful genius. It was really a delightful luxury to hear him giving
free scope to his powers for investigating subtle combinations of
character; for distinguishing all the shades and affinities of some
presiding qualities, disentangling their intricacies, and balancing,
antithetically, one combination of qualities against another. Take, for
instance, any well-known character from the drama, and pique Lloyd's
delicate perception of differences by affecting to think it identical
with some other character of the same class--instantly, in his anxiety
to mark out the features of dissimilitude, he would hurry into an
impromptu analysis of each character separately, with an eloquence,
with a keenness of distinction, and a felicity of phrase, which
were perfectly admirable. This display of familiarity with life and
human nature, in all its masqueradings, was sometimes truly splendid.
But two things were remarkable in these displays. One was, that the
splendour was quite hidden from himself, and unperceived amidst the
effort of mind, and oftentimes severe struggles, in attempting to do
himself justice, both as respected the thoughts and the difficult
task of clothing them in adequate words; he was as free from vanity,
or even from complacency in reviewing what he had effected, as it is
possible for a human creature to be. He thought, indeed, slightly of
his own power; and, which was even a stronger barrier against vanity,
his displays of this kind were always effective in proportion to his
unhappiness; for unhappiness it was, and the restlessness of internal
irritation, that chiefly drove him to exertions of his intellect;
else, and when free from this sort of excitement, he tended to the
quiescent state of a listener; for he thought everybody better than
himself. The other point remarkable in these displays was (and most
unfavourable, of course, it proved to his obtaining the reputation
they merited), that he could succeed in them only before confidential
friends, those on whom he could rely for harbouring no shade of
ridicule towards himself or his theme. Let but one person enter the
room of whose sympathy he did not feel secure, and his powers forsook
him as suddenly as the buoyancy of a bird that has received a mortal
shot in its wing. Accordingly, it is a fact that neither Wordsworth
nor Coleridge ever suspected the amount of power which was latent in
Lloyd; for he firmly believed that both of them despised him. Mrs.
Lloyd thought the same thing. Often and often she has said to me,
smiling in a mournful way--"I know too well that both Wordsworth and
Coleridge entertain a profound contempt for my poor Charles." And,
when I combated this notion, declaring that, although they might (and
probably did) hold very cheap such writers as Rousseau and Madame de
Stael, and, consequently, could not approve of studies directed so
exclusively to their works, or to works of the same class, still that
was not sufficient to warrant them in undervaluing the powers which
Mr. Lloyd applied to such studies. To this, or similar arguments, she
would reply by simply shaking her head, and then sink into silence.

But the time was fast approaching when all pains of this kind, from
supercilious or well-founded disparagement, were to be swallowed up
in more awful considerations and fears. The transition was not a
long one from the state of prosperity in which I found Lloyd about
1807-10 to the utter overthrow of his happiness, and, for his friends,
the overthrow of all hopes on his behalf. In the three years I have
assigned, his situation seemed luxuriously happy, as regarded the
external elements of happiness. He had, without effort of his own, an
income, most punctually remitted from his father, of from £1500 to
£1800 per annum. This income was entirely resigned to the management
of his prudent and excellent wife; and, as his own personal expenses,
separate from those of his family, were absolutely none at all, except
for books, she applied the whole either to the education of her
children, or to the accumulation of all such elegances of life about
their easy unpretending mansion as might soothe her husband's nervous
irritations, or might cheer his drooping spirits with as much variety
of pleasure as a mountainous seclusion allowed. The establishment of
servants was usually limited to six--one only being a man-servant--but
these were well chosen: and one or two were confidential servants,
tried by long experience. Rents are always low in the country for
unfurnished houses; and, even for the country, Low Brathay was a
cheap house; but it contained everything for comfort, nothing at all
for splendour. Consequently, a very large part of their income was
disposable for purposes of hospitality; and, when I first knew them,
Low Brathay was distinguished above every other house at the head of
Windermere, or within ten miles of that neighbourhood, by the judicious
assortment of its dinner parties, and the gaiety of its _soirées
dansantes_. These parties were never crowded; poor Lloyd rarely danced
himself; but it gladdened his benevolent heart to see the young and
blooming floating through the mazes of the dances then fashionable,
whilst he sat by, looking on, at times, with pleasure from his sympathy
with the pleasure of others; at times pursuing some animated discussion
with a literary friend; at times lapsing into profound reverie.
At some of these dances it was that I first saw Wilson of Elleray
(Professor Wilson), in circumstances of animation, and buoyant with
youthful spirits, under the excitement of lights, wine, and, above
all, of female company. He, by the way, was the best male dancer (not
professional) I have ever seen; and this advantage he owed entirely
to the extraordinary strength of his foot in all its parts, to its
peculiarly happy conformation, and to the accuracy of his ear; for, as
to instruction, I have often understood from his family that he never
had any. Here also danced the future wife of Professor Wilson, Miss
Jane P----,[164] at that time the leading belle of the Lake country.
But, perhaps, the most interesting person in those parties, from the
peculiarity of her situation, was Mrs. Lloyd herself, still young,
and, indeed, not apparently exceeding in years most of her unmarried
visitors; still dancing and moving through cotillons, or country
dances, as elegantly and as lightly as the youngest of the company;
still framing her countenance to that expression of cheerfulness which
hospitality required; but stealing for ever troubled glances to the
sofa, or the recess, where her husband had reclined himself, dark
foreboding looks, that saw but too truly the coming darkness which was
soon to swallow up every vestige of this festal pleasure. She looked
upon herself and her children too clearly as a doomed household; and
such, in some sense, they were. And, doubtless, to poor Lloyd himself,
it must a thousandfold have aggravated his sufferings--that he could
trace, with a steady eye, the continual growth of that hideous malady
which was stealing over the else untroubled azure of his life, and with
inaudible foot was hastening onwards for ever to that night in which no
man can work, and in which no man can hope.

It was so painful to Charles Lloyd, naturally, to talk much about
his bodily sufferings, and it would evidently have been so unfeeling
in one who had no medical counsels to offer, if, for the mere
gratification of his curiosity, he had asked for any circumstantial
account of its nature or symptoms, that I am at this moment almost
as much at a loss to understand what was the mode of suffering which
it produced, how it operated, and through what organs, as any of my
readers can be. All that I know is this:--For several years--six or
seven, suppose--the disease expressed itself by intense anguish of
irritation; not an irritation that gnawed at any one local spot, but
diffused itself; sometimes causing a determination of blood to the
head, then shaping itself in a general sense of plethoric congestion
in the blood-vessels, then again remoulding itself into a restlessness
that became insupportable; preying upon the spirits and the fortitude,
and finding no permanent relief or periodic interval of rest, night or
day. Sometimes Lloyd used robust exercise, riding on horseback as fast
as he could urge the horse forward; sometimes, for many weeks together,
he walked for twenty miles, or even more, at a time; sometimes (this
was in the earlier stages of the case) he took large doses of ether;
sometimes he used opium, and, I believe, in very large quantities;
and I understood him to say that, for a time, it subdued the excess
of irritability, and the agonizing accumulation of spasmodic strength
which he felt for ever growing upon him, and, as it were, upon the
very surface of his whole body. But all remedies availed him nothing;
and once he said to me, when we were out upon the hills--"Ay, that
landscape below, with its quiet cottage, looks lovely, I dare say, to
you: as for me, I see it, but I feel it not at all; for, if I begin
to think of the happiness, and its various modes which, no doubt,
belong to the various occupants, according to their ages and hopes,
then I _could_ begin to feel it; but it would be a painful effort
to me; and the worst of all would be when I _had_ felt it; for that
would so sharpen the prospect before me, that just such happiness,
which naturally ought to be mine, is soon on the point of slipping
away from me for ever." Afterwards he told me that his situation
internally was always this: it seemed to him as if on some distant road
he heard a dull trampling sound, and that he knew it, by a misgiving,
to be the sound of some man, or party of men, continually advancing
slowly, continually threatening, or continually accusing him; that all
the various artifices which he practised for cheating himself into
comfort, or beguiling his sad forebodings, were, in fact, but like so
many furious attempts, by drum and trumpets, or even by artillery,
to drown the distant noise of his enemies; that, every now and then,
mere curiosity, or rather breathless anxiety, caused him to hush the
artificial din, and to put himself into the attitude of listening
again; when, again and again, and so he was sure it would still be, he
caught the sullen and accursed sound, trampling and voices of men, or
whatever it were, still steadily advancing, though still perhaps at a
great distance. It was too evident that derangement of the intellect,
in some shape, was coming on; because slight and transient fits of
aberration from his perfect mind had already, at intervals, overtaken
him; flying showers, from the skirts of the clouds, that precede and
announce the main storm. This was the anguish of his situation, that,
for years, he saw before him what was on the road to overwhelm his
faculties and his happiness. Still his fortitude did not wholly forsake
him, and, in fact, proved to be far greater than I or others had given
him credit for possessing. Once only he burst suddenly into tears, on
hearing the innocent voices of his own children laughing, and of one
especially who was a favourite; and he told me that sometimes, when
this little child took his hand and led him passively about the garden,
he had a feeling that prompted him (however weak and foolish it seemed)
to call upon this child for protection; and that it seemed to him as
if he might still escape, could he but surround himself only with
children. No doubt this feeling arose out of his sense that a confusion
was stealing over his thoughts, and that men would soon find this out
to be madness, and would deal with him accordingly; whereas children,
as long as he did them no harm, would see no reason for shutting him up
from his own fireside, and from the human face divine.

It would be too painful to pursue the unhappy case through all its
stages. For a long time, the derangement of poor Lloyd's mind was
but partial and fluctuating; and it was the opinion of Professor
Wilson, from what he had observed, that it was possible to recall
him to himself by firmly opposing his delusions. He certainly, on
his own part, did whatever he could to wean his thoughts from gloomy
contemplation, by pre-occupying them with cheerful studies, and such
as might call out his faculties. He translated the whole of Alfieri's
dramas, and published his translation. He wrote and printed (but did
not publish) a novel in two volumes; my copy of which he soon after
begged back again so beseechingly that I yielded; and so, I believe,
did all his other friends: in which case no copy may now exist. All,
however, availed him not; the crisis so long dreaded arrived. He was
taken away to a lunatic asylum; and, for some long time, he was lost
to me as to the rest of the world. The first memorial I had of him was
a gentleman, with his hair in disorder, rushing into my cottage at
Grasmere, throwing his arms about my neck, and bursting into stormy
weeping--it was poor Lloyd!

Yes, it was indeed poor Lloyd, a fugitive from a madhouse, and throwing
himself for security upon the honour and affection of one whom, with
good reason, he supposed confidentially attached to him. Could there be
a situation so full of interest or perplexity? Should any ill happen
to himself, or to another, through his present enlargement--should he
take any fit of vindictive malice against any person whom he might
view as an accomplice in the plans against his own freedom--and
probably many persons in the neighbourhood, medical and non-medical,
stood liable to such a suspicion--upon me, I felt, as the abettor of
his evasion, would all the blame settle. And unfortunately we had, in
the recent records of this very vale, a most awful lesson, and still
fresh in everybody's remembrance, of the danger connected with this
sort of criminal connivance, or passive participation in the purposes
of maniacal malignity. A man, named Watson, had often and for years
threatened to kill his aged and inoffensive mother. His threats, partly
from their own monstrosity, and from the habit of hearing him for years
repeating them without any serious attempt to give them effect--partly
also from an unwillingness to aggravate the suffering of the poor
lunatic, by translating him out of a mountaineer's liberty into the
gloomy confinement of an hospital--were treated with neglect; and at
length, after years of disregarded menace, and direct forewarning
to the parish authorities, he took an opportunity (which indeed was
rarely wanting to him) of killing the poor gray-headed woman by her own
fireside. This case I had before my mind; and it was the more entitled
to have weight with me when connected with the altered temper of Lloyd,
who now, for the first time in his life, had dropped his gentle and
remarkably quiet demeanour, for a tone, savage and ferocious, towards
more than one individual. This tone, however, lurked under a mask,
and did not come forward, except by fits and starts, for the present.
Indeed his whole manner wore the appearance of studied dissimulation,
from the moment when he perceived that I was not alone. In the interval
of years since I had last seen him (which might have been in 1816) my
own marriage had taken place; accordingly, on turning round and seeing
a young woman seated at the tea-table, where heretofore he had been so
sure of finding me alone, he seemed shocked at the depth of emotion
which he had betrayed before a stranger, and anxious to reinstate
himself in his own self-respect, by assuming a tone of carelessness
and indifference. No person in the world could feel more profoundly on
his account than the young stranger before him, who in fact was not a
stranger to his situation and the excess of his misery. But this he
could not know; and it was not, therefore, until we found ourselves
alone, that he could be prevailed upon to speak of himself, or of the
awful circumstances surrounding him, unless in terms of most unsuitable
levity.

One thing I resolved, at any rate, to make the rule of my conduct
towards this unhappy friend, viz. to deal frankly with him, and in no
case to make myself a party to any plot upon his personal freedom.
Retaken I knew he would be, but not through me; even a murderer in such
a case (_i.e._ the case of having thrown himself upon my good faith) I
would not betray. I drew from him an account of the immediate facts in
his late escape, and his own acknowledgment that even now the pursuit
must be close at hand; probably, that his recaptors were within a few
hours' distance of Grasmere; that he would be easily traced. That my
cottage furnished no means of concealment, he knew too well; still in
these respects he was not worse off in Grasmere than elsewhere; and, at
any rate, it might save him from immediate renewal of his agitation,
and might procure for him one night of luxurious rest and relaxation,
by means of conversation with a friend, if he would make up his mind
to stay with us until his pursuers should appear; and them I could
easily contrive to delay, for at least one day and night, by throwing
false information in their way, such as would send them on to Keswick
at least, if not to Whitehaven, through the collusion of the very few
persons who could have seen him enter my door. My plan was simple and
feasible: but, somehow or other, and, I believe, chiefly because he did
not find me alone, nothing I could say had any weight with him; nor
would he be persuaded to stay longer than for a little tea. Staying so
short a time, he found it difficult to account for having ever come.
But it was too evidently useless to argue the point with him; for he
was altered, and had become obstinate and intractable. I prepared,
therefore, to gratify him according to his own plan, by bearing him
company on the road to Ambleside, and (as he said) to Brathay. We set
off on foot: the distance to Ambleside is about three and a half miles;
and one-third of this distance brought us to an open plain on the
margin of Rydalmere, where the road lies entirely open to the water.
This lake is unusually shallow, by comparison with all its neighbours;
but, at the point I speak of, it takes (especially when seen under any
mode of imperfect light) the appearance of being gloomily deep: two
islands of exquisite beauty, but strongly discriminated in character,
and a sort of recess or bay in the opposite shore, across which the
shadows of the hilly margin stretch with great breadth and solemnity
of effect to the very centre of the lake,--together with the very
solitary character of the entire valley, on which (excluding the little
hamlet in its very gorge or entrance) there is not more than one
single house,--combine to make the scene as impressive by night as any
in the Lake country. At this point it was that my poor friend paused
to converse, and, as it seemed, to take his leave, with an air of
peculiar sadness, as if he had foreseen (what in fact proved to be the
truth) that we now saw each other for the final time. The spot seemed
favourable to confidential talk; and here, therefore, he proceeded
to make his heart-rending communication: here he told me rapidly the
tale of his sufferings, and, what oppressed his mind far more than
those at this present moment, of the cruel indignities to which he
had been under the necessity of submitting. In particular, he said,
that a man of great muscular power had instructions to knock him down
whenever he made any allusion to certain speculative subjects which
the presiding authorities of the asylum chose to think connected with
his unhappy disease. Many other brutalities, damnable and dishonouring
to human nature, were practised in this asylum, not always by abuse of
the powers lodged in the servants, but by direct authority from the
governors; and yet it had been selected as the one most favourable to
a liberal treatment of the patients; and, in reality, it continued to
hold a very high reputation.

Great and monstrous are the abuses which have been detected in such
institutions, and exposed by parliamentary interference, as well as by
the energy of individual philanthropists; but it occurs to one most
forcibly, that, after all, the light of this parliamentary torch must
have been but feeble and partial, when it was possible for cases such
as these to escape all general notice, and for the establishment which
fostered them to retain a character as high as any in the land for
enlightened humanity. Perhaps the paramount care in the treatment of
lunatics should be directed towards those appliances, and that mode
of discipline, which is best fitted for restoring the patient finally
to a sane condition; but the _second_ place in the machinery of his
proper management should be reserved for that system of attentions,
medical or non-medical, which has the best chance of making him happy
for the present; and especially because his present happiness must
always be one of the directest avenues to his restoration. In the
present case, could it be imagined that the shame, agitation, and
fury, which convulsed poor Lloyd, as he went over the circumstances
of his degradation, were calculated for any other than the worst
effects upon the state and prospects of his malady? By sustaining the
tumult of his brain, they must, almost of themselves, have precluded
his restoration. At the side of that quiet lake he stood for nearly
an hour repeating his wrongs, his eyes glaring continually, as the
light thrown off from those parts of the lake which reflected bright
tracts of sky amongst the clouds fitfully illuminated them, and again
and again threatening, with gestures the wildest, vengeance the most
savage upon those vile keepers who had so abused any just purposes of
authority. He would talk of little else; apparently he could not. A
hollow effort he would make now and then, when his story had apparently
reached its close, to sustain the topics of ordinary conversation; but
in a minute he had relapsed into the one subject which possessed him.
In vain I pressed him to return with me to Grasmere. He was now, for a
few hours to come, to be befriended by the darkness; and he resolved
to improve the opportunity for some purpose of his own, which, as he
showed no disposition to communicate any part of his future plans, I
did not directly inquire into. In fact, part of his purpose in stopping
where he did had been to let me know that he did not wish for company
any further. We parted; and I saw him no more. He was soon recaptured;
then transferred to some more eligible asylum; then liberated from all
restraint; after which, with his family, he went to France; where again
it became necessary to deprive him of liberty. And, finally, in France
it was that his feverish existence found at length a natural rest and
an everlasting liberty; for there it was, in a _maison de santé_, at
or near Versailles, that he died (and I believe tranquilly), a few
years after he had left England. Death was indeed to him, in the words
of that fine mystic, Blake the artist, a "golden gate"--the gate of
liberation from the captivity of half a life; or, as I once found the
case beautifully expressed in a volume of poems a century old, and
otherwise poor enough, for they offered nothing worth recollecting
beyond this single line, in speaking of the particular morning in which
some young man had died--

     "That morning brought him peace and liberty."

Charles Lloyd never returned to Brathay after he had once been removed
from it; and the removal of his family soon followed. Mrs. Lloyd,
indeed, returned at intervals from France to England, upon business
connected with the interests of her family; and, during one of those
fugitive visits, she came to the Lakes, where she selected Grasmere
for her residence, so that I had opportunities of seeing her every
day, for a space of several weeks. Otherwise, I never again saw any of
the family, except one son, an interesting young man, who sought most
meritoriously, by bursting asunder the heavy yoke of constitutional
inactivity, to extract a balm for his own besetting melancholy from a
constant series of exertions in which he had forced himself to engage
for promoting education or religious knowledge amongst his poorer
neighbours. But often and often, in years after all was gone, I have
passed old Brathay, or have gone over purposely after dark, about the
time when, for many a year, I used to go over to spend the evening;
and, seating myself on a stone, by the side of the mountain river
Brathay, have staid for hours listening to the same sound to which
so often Charles Lloyd and I used to hearken together with profound
emotion and awe--the sound of pealing anthems, as if streaming from
the open portals of some illimitable cathedral; for such a sound does
actually arise, in many states of the weather, from the peculiar action
of the river Brathay upon its rocky bed; and many times I have heard
it, of a quiet night, when no stranger could have been persuaded to
believe it other than the sound of choral chanting--distant, solemn,
saintly. Its meaning and expression were, in those earlier years,
uncertain and general; not more pointed or determined in the direction
which it impressed upon one's feelings than the light of setting suns:
and sweeping, in fact, the whole harp of pensive sensibilities, rather
than striking the chord of any one specific sentiment. But since the
ruin or dispersion of that household, after the smoke had ceased to
ascend from their hearth, or the garden walks to re-echo their voices,
oftentimes, when lying by the river side, I have listened to the same
aerial saintly sound, whilst looking back to that night, long hidden in
the frost of receding years, when Charles and Sophia Lloyd, now lying
in foreign graves, first dawned upon me, coming suddenly out of rain
and darkness; then--young, rich, happy, full of hope, belted with young
children (of whom also most are long dead), and standing apparently
on the verge of a labyrinth of golden hours. Musing on that night in
November, 1807, and then upon the wreck that had been wrought by a
space of fifteen years, I would say to myself sometimes, and seem to
hear it in the songs of this watery cathedral--Put not your trust in
any fabric of happiness that has its root in man or the children of
men. Sometimes even I was tempted to discover in the same music a sound
such as this--Love nothing, love nobody, for thereby comes a killing
curse in the rear. But sometimes also, very early on a summer morning,
when the dawn was barely beginning to break, all things locked in
sleep, and only some uneasy murmur or cock-crow, at a faint distance,
giving a hint of resurrection for earth and her generations, I have
heard in that same chanting of the little mountain river a more solemn
if a less agitated admonition--a requiem over departed happiness, and
a protestation against the thought that so many excellent creatures,
but a little lower than the angels, whom I have seen only to love in
this life--so many of the good, the brave, the beautiful, the wise--can
have appeared for no higher purpose or prospect than simply to point
a moral, to cause a little joy and many tears, a few perishing moons
of happiness and years of vain regret! No! that the destiny of man is
more in correspondence with the grandeur of his endowments, and that
our own mysterious tendencies are written hieroglyphically in the
vicissitudes of day and night, of winter and summer, and throughout the
great alphabet of Nature! But on that theme--beware, reader! Listen to
no _intellectual_ argument. One argument there is, one only there is,
of philosophic value: an argument drawn from the _moral_ nature of man:
an argument of Immanuel Kant's. The rest are dust and ashes.

Passing onwards from Brathay, a ride of about forty minutes carries you
to the summit of a wild heathy tract, along which, even at noonday,
few sounds are heard that indicate the presence of man, except now
and then a woodman's axe in some of the many coppice-woods scattered
about that neighbourhood. In Northern England there are no sheep-bells;
which is an unfortunate defect, as regards the full impression of wild
solitudes, whether amongst undulating heaths or towering rocks: at
any rate, it is so felt by those who, like myself, have been trained
to its soothing effects upon the hills of Somersetshire--the Cheddar,
the Mendip, or the Quantock--or any other of those breezy downs which
once constituted such delightful local distinctions for four or five
counties in that south-west angle of England. At all hours of day
or night, this silvery tinkle was delightful; but, after sunset,
in the solemn hour of gathering twilight, heard (as it always was)
intermittingly, and at great varieties of distance, it formed the most
impressive incident for the ear, and the most in harmony with the other
circumstances of the scenery, that, perhaps, anywhere exists--not
excepting even the natural sounds, the swelling and dying intonations
of insects wheeling in their vesper flights. Silence and desolation are
never felt so profoundly as when they are interrupted by solemn sounds,
recurring by uncertain intervals, and from distant places. But in
these Westmoreland heaths, and uninhabited ranges of hilly ground, too
often nothing is heard except occasionally the wild cry of a bird--the
plover, the snipe, or perhaps the raven's croak. The general impression
is, therefore, cheerless; and the more are you rejoiced when, looking
down from some one of the eminences which you have been gradually
ascending, you descry, at a great depth below,[166] the lovely lake
of Coniston. The head of this lake is the part chiefly interesting,
both from the sublime character of the mountain barriers, and from the
intricacy of the little valleys at their base.

On a little verdant knoll, near the north-eastern margin of the lake,
stands a small villa, called Tent Lodge, built by Colonel Smith,
and for many years occupied by his family. That daughter of Colonel
Smith who drew the public attention so powerfully upon herself by
the splendour of her attainments had died some months before I came
into the country.[167] But yet, as I was subsequently acquainted with
her family through the Lloyds (who were within an easy drive of Tent
Lodge), and as, moreover, with regard to Miss Elizabeth Smith herself,
I came to know more than the world knew--drawing my knowledge from many
of her friends, but especially from Mrs. Hannah More, who had been
intimately connected with her: for these reasons, I shall rehearse the
leading points of her story; and the rather because her family, who
were equally interested in that story, long continued to form part of
the Lake society.

On my first becoming acquainted with Miss Smith's pretensions, it is
very true that I regarded them with but little concern; for nothing
ever interests me less than great philological attainments, or at
least that mode of philological learning which consists in mastery
over languages. But one reason for this indifference is, that the
apparent splendour is too often a false one. They who know a vast
number of languages rarely know any one with accuracy; and, the more
they gain in one way, the more they lose in another. With Miss Smith,
however, I gradually came to know that this was not the case; or,
at any rate, but partially the case; for, of some languages which
she possessed, and those the least accessible, it appeared, finally,
that she had even a critical knowledge. It created also a secondary
interest in these difficult accomplishments of hers, to find that
they were so very extensive. Secondly, That they were pretty nearly
all of self-acquisition. Thirdly, That they were borne so meekly, and
with unaffected absence of all ostentation. As to the first point,
it appears (from Mrs. H. Bowdler's Letter to Dr. Mummsen, the friend
of Klopstock)[168] that she made herself mistress of the French, the
Italian, the Spanish, the Latin, the German, the Greek, and the Hebrew
languages. She had no inconsiderable knowledge of the Syriac, the
Arabic, and the Persic. She was a good geometrician and algebraist. She
was a very expert musician. She drew from nature, and had an accurate
knowledge of perspective. Finally, she manifested an early talent for
poetry; but, from pure modesty, destroyed most of what she had written,
as soon as her acquaintance with the Hebrew models had elevated the
standard of true poetry in her mind, so as to disgust her with what she
now viewed as the tameness and inefficiency of her own performances.
As to the second point--that for these attainments she was indebted,
almost exclusively, to her own energy,--this is placed beyond all doubt
by the fact that the only governess she ever had (a young lady not
much beyond her own age) did not herself possess, and therefore could
not have communicated, any knowledge of languages, beyond a little
French and Italian. Finally, as to the modesty with which she wore her
distinctions, _that_ is sufficiently established by every page of
her printed works, and her letters. Greater diffidence, as respected
herself, or less willingness to obtrude her knowledge upon strangers,
or even upon those correspondents who would have wished her to make
a little more display, cannot be imagined. And yet I repeat that her
knowledge was as sound and as profound as it was extensive. For, taking
only one instance of this, her Translation of Job has been pronounced,
by Biblical critics of the first rank, a work of real and intrinsic
value, without any reference to the disadvantages of the translator,
or without needing any allowances whatever. In particular, Dr. Magee,
the celebrated writer on the Atonement, and subsequently a dignitary of
the Irish Church--certainly one of the best qualified judges at that
time--describes it as "conveying more of the character and meaning
of the Hebrew, with fewer departures from the idiom of the English,
than any other translation whatever that we possess." So much for the
scholarship; whilst he rightly notices, in proof of the translator's
taste and discretion, that "from the received version she very seldom
unnecessarily deviates": thus refusing to disturb what was, generally
speaking, so excellent and time-hallowed for any dazzling effects
of novelty; and practising this forbearance as much as possible,
notwithstanding novelty was, after all, the main attraction upon which
the new translation must rest.

The example of her modesty, however, is not more instructive than that
of her continued struggle with difficulties in pursuing knowledge,
and with misfortunes in supporting a Christian fortitude. I shall
briefly sketch her story:--She was born at Burnhall, in the county of
Durham, at the latter end of the year 1776. Early in 1782, when she
had just entered her sixth year, her parents removed into Suffolk,
in order to be near a blind relation, who looked with anxiety to the
conscientious attentions of Mrs. Smith in superintending his comforts
and interests. This occupation absorbed so much of her time that she
found it necessary to obtain the aid of a stranger in directing the
studies of her daughter. An opportunity just then offered of attaining
this object, concurrently with another not less interesting to herself,
viz. that of offering an asylum to a young lady who had recently been
thrown adrift upon the world by the misfortunes of her parents. They
had very suddenly fallen from a station of distinguished prosperity;
and the young lady herself, then barely sixteen, was treading that
path of severe adversity upon which, by a most singular parallelism
of ill fortune, her young pupil was destined to follow her steps at
exactly the same age. Being so prematurely called to the office of
governess, this young lady was expected rather to act as an elder
companion, and as a lightener of the fatigues attached to their common
studies, than exactly as their directress. And, at all events, from
her, who was the only even nominal governess that Miss Smith ever had,
it is certain that she could have learned little or nothing. This
arrangement subsisted between two and three years, when the death of
their blind kinsman allowed Mr. Smith's family to leave Suffolk, and
resume their old domicile of Burnhall. But from this, by a sudden gleam
of treacherous prosperity, they were summoned, in the following year
(June, 1785) to the splendid inheritance of Piercefield--a show-place
upon the river Wye, and, next after Tintern Abbey and the river itself,
an object of attraction to all who then visited the Wye.

A residence on the Wye, besides its own natural attraction, has this
collateral advantage, that it brings Bath (not to mention Clifton and
the Hot Wells) within a visiting distance for people who happen to
have carriages; and Bath, it is hardly necessary to say, besides its
stationary body of polished and intellectual residents, has also a
floating casual population of eminent or interesting persons, gathered
into this focus from every quarter of the empire. Amongst the literary
connexions which the Piercefield family had formed in Bath was one with
Mrs. Bowdler and her daughter--two ladies not distinguished by any very
powerful talents, but sufficiently tinctured with literature and the
love of literature to be liberal in their opinions. And, fortunately
(as it turned out for Miss Smith), they were eminently religious: but
not in a bigoted way; for they were conciliating and winning in the
outward expression of their religious character; capable of explaining
their own creed with intelligent consistency; and, finally, were the
women to recommend any creed by the sanctity and the benignity of
their own lives. This strong religious bias of the two Bath ladies
operated in Miss Smith's favour by a triple service. First of all, it
was this depth of religious feeling, and, consequently, of interest in
the Scriptures, which had originally moved the elder Mrs. Bowdler to
study the Hebrew and the Greek, as the two languages in which they had
been originally delivered. And this example it was of _female_ triumph
over their difficulties, together with the proof thus given that such
attainments were entirely reconcilable with feminine gentleness,
which first suggested to Miss Smith the project of her philological
studies; and, doubtless, these studies, by the constant and agreeable
occupation which they afforded, overspread the whole field of her life
with pleasurable activity. "From the above-mentioned visit," says her
mother, writing to Dr. Randolph,[169] and referring to the visit which
these Bath ladies had made to Piercefield--"from the above-mentioned
visit I date the turn of study which Elizabeth ever after pursued, and
which I firmly believe the amiable conduct of our guests first led her
to delight in." Secondly, to the religious sympathies which connected
these two ladies with Miss Smith was owing the fervour of that
friendship which afterwards, in their adversity, the Piercefield family
found more strenuously exerted in their behalf by the Bowdlers than
by all the rest of their connexions. And, finally, it was this piety
and religious resignation, with which she had been herself inoculated
by her Bath friends, that, throughout the calamitous era of her life,
enabled Miss Elizabeth Smith to maintain her own cheerfulness unbroken,
and greatly to support the failing fortitude of her mother.

This visit of her Bath friends to Piercefield--so memorable an event
for the whole subsequent life of Miss Smith--occurred in the summer of
1789; consequently, when she was just twelve and a half years old. And
the impressions then made upon her childish, but unusually thoughtful,
mind, were kept up by continual communications, personal or written,
through the years immediately succeeding. Just two and a half years
after, in the very month when Miss Smith accomplished her fifteenth
year, upon occasion of going through the rite of Confirmation,
according to the discipline of the English Church, she received a
letter of religious counsel--grave, affectionate, but yet humble--from
the elder Mrs. Bowdler, which might almost have been thought to have
proceeded from a writer who had looked behind the curtain of fate, and
had seen the forge at whose fires the shafts of Heaven were even now
being forged.

Just twelve months from the date of this letter, in the very month when
Miss Elizabeth Smith completed her sixteenth year, the storm descended
upon the house of Piercefield. The whole estate, a splendid one, was
swept away by the failure (as I have heard) of one banking-house; nor
were there recovered, until some years after, any slender fragments of
that estate. Piercefield was, of course, sold; but that was not the
heaviest of her grievances to Miss Smith. She was now far advanced
upon her studious career; for it should be mentioned, as a lesson to
other young ladies of what may be accomplished by unassisted labour,
that, between the ages of thirteen and twenty-one, all her principal
acquisitions were made. No treasure, therefore, could, in her eyes,
be of such priceless value as the Piercefield library; but this also
followed the general wreck: not a volume, not a pamphlet, was reserved;
for the family were proud in their integrity, and would receive no
favours from the creditors. Under this scorching test, applied to the
fidelity of friends, many, whom Mrs. Smith mentions in one of her
letters under the name of "summer friends," fled from them by crowds:
dinners, balls, soirées--credit, influence, support--these things were
no longer to be had from Piercefield. But more annoying even than
the fickle levity of such open deserters, was the timid and doubtful
countenance, as I have heard Mrs. Smith say, which was still offered to
them by some who did not relish, _for their own sakes_, being classed
with those who had paid their homage only to the fine house and fine
equipages of Piercefield. These persons continued, therefore, to send
invitations to the family; but so frigidly that every expression
manifested but too forcibly how disagreeable was the duty with which
they were complying, and how much more they submitted to it for their
own reputation's sake than for any kindness they felt to their old
friends. Mrs. Smith was herself a very haughty woman, and it maddened
her to be the object of condescensions so insolent and so reluctant.

Meantime, her daughter, young as she was, became the moral support of
her whole family, and the fountain from which they all drew consolation
and fortitude. She was confirmed in her religious tendencies by two
circumstances of her recent experience: one was that she, the sole
person of her family who courted religious consolations, was also the
sole person who had been able to maintain cheerfulness and uniform
spirits: the other was that, although it could not be truly said of
_all_ their worldly friends that they had forsaken them, yet of their
religious friends it could be said that not one had done so; and at
last, when for some time they had been so far reduced as not to have a
roof over their heads, by one of these religious friends it was that
they were furnished with every luxury as well as comfort of life,
and in a spirit of such sisterly kindness as made the obligation not
painful to the proudest amongst them.

It was in 1792 that the Piercefield family had been ruined; and in
1794, out of the wrecks which had been gathered together, Mr. Smith
(the father of the family) bought a commission in the army. For some
time the family continued to live in London, Bath, and other parts of
England; but, at length, Mr. Smith's regiment was ordered to the west
of Ireland; and the ladies of his family resolved to accompany him
to head-quarters. In passing through Wales (May, 1796) they paid a
visit to those sentimental anchorites of the last generation whom so
many of us must still remember--Miss Ponsonby and Lady Eleanor Butler
(a sister of Lord Ormond), whose hermitage stood near to Llangollen,
and, therefore, close to the usual Irish route, by way of Holyhead.
On landing in Ireland, they proceeded to a seat of Lord Kingston--a
kind-hearted, hospitable Irishman, who was on the old Piercefield list
of friends, and had never wavered in his attachment. Here they stayed
three weeks. Miss Smith renewed, on this occasion, her friendship
with Lady Isabella King, the daughter of Lord Kingston; and a little
incident connected with this visit gave her an opportunity afterwards
of showing her delicate sense of the sacred character which attaches
to gifts of friendship, and showing it by an ingenious device that
may be worth the notice of other young ladies in the same case. Lady
Isabella had given to Miss Smith a beautiful horse, called Brunette.
In process of time, when they had ceased to be in the neighbourhood of
any regimental stables, it became matter of necessity that Brunette
should be parted with. To have given the animal away, had that been
otherwise possible, might only have been delaying the sale for a short
time. After some demur, therefore, Miss Smith adopted this plan: she
sold Brunette, but applied the whole of the price, 120 guineas, to the
purchase of a splendid harp. The harp was christened Brunette, and was
religiously preserved to the end of her life. Now, Brunette, after all,
must have died in a few years; but, by translating her friend's gift
into another form, she not only connected the image of her distant
friend, and her sense of that friend's kindness, with a pleasure and a
useful purpose of her own, but she conferred on that gift a perpetuity
of existence.

At length came the day when the Smiths were to quit Kingston Lodge for
the quarters of the regiment. And now came the first rude trial of Mrs.
Smith's fortitude, as connected with points of mere decent comfort.
Hitherto, floating amongst the luxurious habitations of opulent
friends, she might have felt many privations as regarded splendour
and direct personal power, but never as regarded the primary elements
of comfort, warmth, cleanliness, convenient arrangements. But on this
journey, which was performed by all the party on horseback, it rained
incessantly. They reached their quarters drenched with wet, weary,
hungry, forlorn. The quartermaster had neglected to give any directions
for their suitable accommodation--no preparations whatever had been
made for receiving them; and, from the luxuries of Lord Kingston's
mansion, which habit had made so familiar to them all, the ladies found
themselves suddenly transferred to a miserable Irish cabin--dirty,
narrow, nearly quite unfurnished, and thoroughly disconsolate. Mrs.
Smith's proud spirit fairly gave way, and she burst out into a fit of
weeping. Upon this, her daughter Elizabeth (and Mrs. Smith herself it
was that told the anecdote, and often she told it, or told others of
the same character, at Lloyd's), in a gentle, soothing tone, began to
suggest the many blessings which lay before them in life, and some even
for this evening.

"Blessings, child!"--her mother impatiently interrupted her. "What
sort of blessings? Irish blessings!--county of Sligo blessings, I
fancy. Or, perhaps, you call this a blessing?" holding up a miserable
fragment of an iron rod, which had been left by way of poker, or rather
as a substitute for the whole assortment of fire-irons. The daughter
laughed; but she changed her wet dress expeditiously, assumed an apron;
and so various were her accomplishments that, in no long time, she
had gathered together a very comfortable dinner for her parents, and,
amongst other things, a currant tart, which she had herself made, in a
tenement absolutely unfurnished of every kitchen utensil.

In the autumn of this year (1796), they returned to England; and, after
various migrations through the next four years, amongst which was
another and longer visit to Ireland in 1800, they took up their abode
in the sequestered vale of Patterdale. Here they had a cottage upon
the banks of Ulleswater; the most gorgeous of the English lakes, from
the rich and ancient woods which possess a great part of its western
side; the sublimest, as respects its mountain accompaniments, except
only, perhaps, Wastdale; and, I believe, the largest; for, though only
nine miles in length, and, therefore, shorter by about two miles than
Windermere, it averages a greater breadth. Here, at this time, was
living Mr. Clarkson--that son of thunder, that Titan, who was in fact
the one great Atlas that bore up the Slave-Trade Abolition cause--now
resting from his mighty labours and nerve-shattering perils. So much
had _his_ nerves been shattered by all that he had gone through in
toil, in suffering, and in anxiety, that, for many years, I have heard
it said, he found himself unable to walk up stairs without tremulous
motions of his limbs. He was, perhaps, too iron a man, too much like
the _Talus_ of Spenser's "Faerie Queene,"[170] to appreciate so gentle
a creature as Miss Elizabeth Smith. A more suitable friend, and one
who thoroughly comprehended her, and expressed his admiration for her
in verse, was Thomas Wilkinson of Yanwath, a Quaker, a man of taste,
and of delicate sensibility. He wrote verses occasionally; and, though
feebly enough as respected poetic power, there were often such delicate
touches of feeling, such gleams of real tenderness, in some redeeming
part of each poem, that even Wordsworth admired and read them aloud
with pleasure. Indeed Wordsworth has addressed to him one copy of
verses, or rather to his spade, which was printed in the collection of
1807, and which Lord Jeffrey, after quoting one line, dismissed as too
dull for repetition.

During this residence upon Ulleswater (winter of 1800) it was that
a very remarkable incident befell Miss Smith. I have heard it often
mentioned, and sometimes with a slight variety of circumstances; but I
here repeat it from an account drawn up by Miss Smith herself, who was
most literally exact and faithful to the truth in all reports of her
own personal experience. There is, on the western side of Ulleswater,
a fine cataract (or, in the language of the country, a _force_), known
by the name of Airey Force; and it is of importance enough, especially
in rainy seasons, to attract numerous visitors from among "the Lakers."
Thither, with some purpose of sketching, not the whole scene, but some
picturesque features of it, Miss Smith had gone, quite unaccompanied.
The road to it lies through Gobarrow Park; and it was usual, at that
time, to take a guide from the family of the Duke of Norfolk's keeper,
who lived in Lyulph's Tower--a solitary hunting lodge, built by his
Grace for the purposes of an annual visit which he used to pay to
his estates in that part of England. She, however, thinking herself
sufficiently familiar with the localities, had declined to encumber
her motions with such an attendant; consequently she was alone. For
half an hour or more, she continued to ascend: and, being a good
"cragswoman," from the experience she had won in Wales as well as in
northern England, she had reached an altitude much beyond what would
generally be thought corresponding to the time. The path had vanished
altogether; but she continued to pick out one for herself amongst the
stones, sometimes receding from the _force_, sometimes approaching it,
according to the openings allowed by the scattered masses of rock.
Pressing forward in this hurried way, and never looking back, all at
once she found herself in a little stony chamber, from which there
was no egress possible in advance. She stopped and looked up. There
was a frightful silence in the air. She felt a sudden palpitation
at her heart, and a panic from she knew not what. Turning, however,
hastily, she soon wound herself out of this aerial dungeon; but by
steps so rapid and agitated, that, at length, on looking round, she
found herself standing at the brink of a chasm, frightful to look
down. That way, it was clear enough, all retreat was impossible; but,
on turning round, retreat seemed in every direction alike even more
impossible. Down the chasm, at least, she might have leaped, though
with little or no chance of escaping with life; but on all other
quarters it seemed to her eye that at no price could she effect an
exit, since the rocks stood round her in a semi-circus, all lofty, all
perpendicular, all glazed with trickling water, or smooth as polished
porphyry. Yet how, then, had she reached the point? The same track,
if she could hit that track, would surely secure her escape. Round
and round she walked; gazed with almost despairing eyes; her breath
became thicker and thicker; for path she could not trace by which it
was possible for her to have entered. Finding herself grow more and
more confused, and every instant nearer to sinking into some fainting
fit or convulsion, she resolved to sit down and turn her thoughts
quietly into some less exciting channel. This she did; gradually
recovered some self-possession; and then suddenly a thought rose up to
her, that she was in the hands of God, and that He would not forsake
her. But immediately came a second and reproving thought--that this
confidence in God's protection might have been justified had she been
ascending the rocks upon any mission of duty; but what right could
_she_ have to any providential deliverance, who had been led thither
in a spirit of levity and carelessness? I am here giving _her_ view of
the case; for, as to myself, I fear greatly that, if _her_ steps were
erring ones, it is but seldom indeed that _nous autres_ can pretend
to be treading upon right paths. Once again she rose; and, supporting
herself upon a little sketching-stool that folded up into a stick, she
looked upwards, in the hope that some shepherd might, by chance, be
wandering in those aerial regions; but nothing could she see except
the tall birches growing at the brink of the highest summits, and the
clouds slowly sailing overhead. Suddenly, however, as she swept the
whole circuit of her station with her alarmed eye, she saw clearly,
about two hundred yards beyond her own position, a lady, in a white
muslin morning robe, such as were then universally worn by young ladies
until dinner-time. The lady beckoned with a gesture and in a manner
that, in a moment, gave her confidence to advance--_how_ she could
not guess; but, in some way that baffled all power to retrace it, she
found instantaneously the outlet which previously had escaped her. She
continued to advance towards the lady, whom now, in the same moment,
she found to be standing upon the other side of the _force_, and also
to be her own sister. How or why that young lady, whom she had left at
home earnestly occupied with her own studies, should have followed and
overtaken her filled her with perplexity. But this was no situation for
putting questions; for the guiding sister began to descend, and, by a
few simple gestures, just serving to indicate when Miss Elizabeth was
to approach and when to leave the brink of the torrent, she gradually
led her down to a platform of rock, from which the further descent was
safe and conspicuous. There Miss Smith paused, in order to take breath
from her panic, as well as to exchange greetings and questions with her
sister. But sister there was none. All trace of her had vanished; and,
when, in two hours after, she reached her home, Miss Smith found her
sister in the same situation and employment in which she had left her;
and the whole family assured her that she had never stirred from the
house.

In 1801, I believe it was that the family removed from Patterdale to
Coniston. Certainly they were settled there in the spring of 1802; for,
in the May of that spring, Miss Elizabeth Hamilton--a writer now very
much forgotten, or remembered only by her "Cottagers of Glenburnie,"
but then a person of mark and authority in the literary circles of
Edinburgh[172]--paid a visit to the Lakes, and stayed there for many
months, together with her married sister, Mrs. Blake; and both ladies
cultivated the friendship of the Smiths. Miss Hamilton was captivated
with the family; and, of the sisters in particular, she speaks as of
persons that, "in the days of paganism would have been worshipped as
beings of a superior order, so elegantly graceful do they appear, when,
with easy motion, they guide their light boat over the waves." And of
Miss Elizabeth, separately, she says, on another occasion,--"I never
before saw so much of Miss Smith; and, in the three days she spent
with us, the admiration which I had always felt for her extraordinary
talents, and as extraordinary virtues, was hourly augmented. She is,
indeed, a most charming creature; and, if one could inoculate her with
a little of the Scotch frankness, I think she would be one of the most
perfect of human beings."

About four years had been delightfully passed in Coniston. In the
summer of 1805 Miss Smith laid the foundation of her fatal illness in
the following way, according to her own account of the case to an old
servant, a very short time before she died:--"One very hot evening,
in July, I took a book, and walked about two miles from home, when I
seated myself on a stone beside the lake. Being much engaged by a poem
I was reading, I did not perceive that the sun was gone down, and was
succeeded by a very heavy dew, till, in a moment, I felt struck on
the chest as if with a sharp knife. I returned home, but said nothing
of the pain. The next day being also very hot, and every one busy in
the hay-field, I thought I would take a rake, and work very hard to
produce perspiration, in the hope that it might remove the pain; but
it did not." From that time, a bad cough, with occasional loss of
voice, gave reason to suspect some organic injury of the lungs. Late
in the autumn of this year (1805) Miss Smith accompanied her mother
and her two younger sisters to Bristol, Bath, and other places in the
south, on visits to various friends. Her health went through various
fluctuations until May of the following year, when she was advised to
try Matlock. Here, after spending three weeks, she grew worse; and,
as there was no place which she liked so well as the Lakes, it was
resolved to turn homewards. About the beginning of June, she and her
mother returned alone to Coniston: one of her sisters was now married;
her three brothers were in the army or navy; and her father almost
constantly with his regiment. Through the next two months she faded
quietly away, sitting always in a tent,[173] that had been pitched upon
the lawn, and which remained open continually to receive the fanning
of the intermitting airs upon the lake, as well as to admit the bold
mountain scenery to the north. She lived nearly through the first week
of August, dying on the morning of August 7; and the circumstances of
her last night are thus recorded by her mother:--"At nine she went
to bed. I resolved to quit her no more, and went to prepare for the
night. Turpin [Miss Smith's maid] came to say that Elizabeth entreated
I would not stay in her room. I replied--'On that one subject I am
resolved; no power on earth shall keep me from her; so, go to bed
yourself.' Accordingly, I returned to her room; and, at ten, gave her
the usual dose of laudanum. After a little time, she fell into a doze,
and, I thought, slept till one. She was uneasy and restless, but never
complained; and, on my wiping the cold sweat off her face, and bathing
it with camphorated vinegar, which I did very often in the course of
the night, she thanked me, smiled, and said--'That is the greatest
comfort I have.' She slept again for a short time; and, at half past
four, asked for some chicken broth, which she took perfectly well.
On being told the hour, she said, '_How long this night is!_' She
continued very uneasy; and, in half an hour after, on my inquiring if
I could move the pillow, or do anything to relieve her, she replied,
'There is nothing for it but quiet.' At six, she said, 'I must get up
and have some mint tea.' I then called for Turpin, and felt my angel's
pulse: it was fluttering; and by that I knew I should soon lose her.
She took the tea well. Turpin began to put on her clothes, and was
proceeding to dress her, when she laid her head upon the faithful
creature's shoulder, became convulsed in the face, spoke not, looked
not, and in ten minutes expired."

She was buried in Hawkshead churchyard, where a small tablet of white
marble is raised to her memory, on which there is the scantiest record
that, for a person so eminently accomplished, I have ever met with.
After mentioning her birth and age (twenty-nine), it closes thus:--"She
possessed great talents, exalted virtues, and humble piety." Anything
so unsatisfactory or so commonplace I have rarely known. As much, or
more, is often said of the most insipid people; whereas Miss Smith
was really a most extraordinary person. I have conversed with Mrs.
Hannah More often about her; and I never failed to draw forth some
fresh anecdote illustrating the vast extent of her knowledge, the
simplicity of her character, the gentleness of her manners, and her
unaffected humility. She passed, it is true, almost inaudibly through
life; and the stir which was made after her death soon subsided. But
the reason was that she wrote but little! Had it been possible for the
world to measure her by her powers, rather than her performances, she
would have been placed, perhaps, in the estimate of posterity, at the
head of learned women; whilst her sweet and feminine character would
have rescued her from all shadow and suspicion of that reproach which
too often settles upon the learned character when supported by female
aspirants.

The family of Tent Lodge continued to reside at Coniston for many
years; and they were connected with the Lake literary clan chiefly
through the Lloyds and those who visited the Lloyds; for it is another
and striking proof of the slight hold which Wordsworth, &c., had upon
the public esteem in those days, that even Miss Smith, with all her
excessive diffidence in judging of books and authors, never seems,
by any one of her letters, to have felt the least interest about
Wordsworth or Coleridge; nor did Miss Hamilton, with all her _esprit
de corps_ and acquired interest in everything at all bearing upon
literature, ever mention them in those of her letters which belong to
the period of her Lake visit in 1802; nor, for the six or seven months
which she passed in that country, and within a short morning ride of
Grasmere, did she ever think it worth her while to seek an introduction
to any one of the resident authors.

Yet this could not be altogether from ignorance that such people
existed; for Thomas Wilkinson, the intimate and admiring friend of Miss
Smith, was also the friend of Wordsworth; and, for some reason that I
never could fathom, he was a sort of pet with Wordsworth. Professor
Wilson and myself were never honoured with one line, one allusion from
his pen; but many a person of particular feebleness has received that
honour. Amongst these I may rank Thomas Wilkinson. Not that I wish
to speak contemptuously of him; he was a Quaker, of elegant habits,
rustic simplicity, and with tastes, as Wordsworth affirms, "too pure
to be refined."[174] His cottage was seated not far from the great
castle of the Lowthers; and, either from mere whim--as sometimes such
whims do possess great ladies--whims, I mean, for drawing about them
odd-looking, old-world people, as _piquant_ contrasts to the fine
gentlemen of their own society--or because they did really feel a
homely dignity in the plain-speaking "Friend," and liked, for a frolic,
to be _thou'd_ and _thee'd_--on some motive or other, at any rate, they
introduced themselves to Mr. Wilkinson's cottage; and I believe that
the connexion was afterwards improved by the use they found for his
services in forming walks through the woods of Lowther, and leading
them in such a circuit as to take advantage of all the most picturesque
stations. As a poet, I presume that Mr. Wilkinson could hardly have
recommended himself to the notice of ladies who would naturally have
modelled their tastes upon the favourites of the age. A poet, however,
in a gentle, unassuming way, he was; and he, therefore, is to be added
to the _corps litteraire_ of the Lakes, and Yanwath to be put down as
the advanced post of that _corps_ to the north.

Two families there still remain which I am tempted to gather into my
group of Lake society--notwithstanding it is true that the two most
interesting members of the first had died a little before the period at
which my sketch commences; and the second, though highly intellectual
in the person of that particular member whom I have chiefly to
commemorate, was not, properly speaking, literary, and, moreover,
belongs to a later period of my own Westmoreland experience--being, at
the time of my settlement in Grasmere, a girl at a boarding-school. The
first was the family of the Sympsons, whom Mr. Wordsworth has spoken
of, with deep interest, more than once. The eldest son, a clergyman,
and, like Wordsworth, an _alumnus_ of Hawkshead school, wrote, amongst
other poems, "The Vision of Alfred." Of these poems Wordsworth says
that they "are little known; but they contain passages of splendid
description; and the versification of his '_Vision_' is harmonious
and animated." This is much for Wordsworth to say; and he does him
even the honour of quoting the following illustrative simile from
his description of the sylphs in motion (which sylphs constitute the
machinery of his poem); and, probably, the reader will be of opinion
that this passage justifies the praise of Wordsworth. It is founded, as
he will see, on the splendid scenery of the heavens in Polar latitudes,
as seen by reflection in polished ice at midnight.

     "Less varying hues beneath the Pole adorn
     The streamy glories of the Boreal morn,
     That, waving to and fro, their radiance shed
     On Bothnia's gulf, with glassy ice o'erspread;
     Where the lone native, as he homeward glides
     On polished sandals o'er the imprisoned tides,
     Sees, at a glance, above him and below,
     Two rival heavens with equal splendour glow:
     Stars, moons, and meteors ray oppose to ray;
     And solemn midnight pours the blaze of day."

"He was a man," says Wordsworth, in conclusion, "of ardent feeling; and
his facilities of mind, particularly his memory, were extraordinary."
Brief notices of his life ought to find a place in the history of
Westmoreland.

But it was the father of this Joseph Sympson who gave its chief
interest to the family. Him Wordsworth has described, at the same time
sketching his history, with a fulness and a circumstantiality beyond
what he has conceded to any other of the real personages in "The
Excursion." "A priest he was by function"; but a priest of that class
which is now annually growing nearer to extinction among us, not being
supported by any sympathies in this age.

                               "His course,
     From his youth up, and high as manhood's noon,
     Had been irregular--I might say wild;
     By books unsteadied, by his pastoral care
     Too little checked. An active, ardent mind;
     A fancy pregnant with resource and scheme
     To cheat the sadness of a rainy day;
     Hands apt for all ingenious arts and games;
     A generous spirit, and a body strong
     To cope with stoutest champions of the bowl;
     Had earned for him sure welcome, and the rights
     Of a priz'd visitant, in the jolly hall
     Of country squire; or at the statelier board
     Of duke or earl, from scenes of courtly pomp
     Withdrawn, to while away the summer hours
     In condescension amongst rural guests.
     With these high comrades he had revelled long,
     By hopes of coming patronage beguiled,
     Till the heart sickened."

Slowly, however, and indignantly his eyes opened fully to the windy
treachery of all the promises held out to him; and, at length, for mere
bread, he accepted, from an "unthought-of patron," a most "secluded
chapelry" in Cumberland. This was "the little, lowly house of prayer"
of Wythburn, elsewhere celebrated by Wordsworth; and, for its own
sake, interesting to all travellers, both for its deep privacy, and
for the excessive humility of its external pretensions, whether as to
size or ornament. Were it not for its twin sister at Buttermere, it
would be the very smallest place of worship in all England; and it
looks even smaller than it is, from its position; for it stands at the
base of the mighty Helvellyn, close to the high-road between Ambleside
and Keswick, and within speaking distance of the upper lake--(for
Wythburn Water, though usually passed by the traveller under the
impression of absolute unity in its waters, owing to the interposition
of a rocky screen, is, in fact, composed of two separate lakes). To
this miniature and most secluded congregation of shepherds did the
once dazzling parson officiate as pastor; and it seems to amplify the
impression already given of his versatility, that he became a diligent
and most fatherly, though not peculiarly devout, teacher and friend.
The temper, however, of the northern Dalesmen, is not constitutionally
turned to religion; consequently that part of his defects did him
no special injury, when compensated (as, in the judgment of these
Dalesmen, it _was_ compensated) by ready and active kindness, charity
the most diffusive, and patriarchal hospitality. The living, as I have
said, was in Wythburn; but there was no parsonage, and no house in
this poor dale which was disposable for that purpose. So Mr. Sympson
crossed the marches of the sister counties, which to him were about
equidistant from his chapel and his house, into Grasmere, on the
Westmoreland side. There he occupied a cottage by the roadside,--a
situation which, doubtless, gratified at once his social and his
hospitable propensities,--and, at length, from age, as well as from
paternal character and station, came to be regarded as the patriarch of
the vale. Before I mention the afflictions which fell upon his latter
end, and by way of picturesque contrast to his closing scene, let me
have permission to cite Wordsworth's sketch (taken from his own boyish
remembrance of the case) describing the first gipsy-like entrance of
the brilliant parson and his household into Grasmere--so equally out of
harmony with the decorums of his sacred character and the splendours of
his past life:--

     "Rough and forbidding were the choicest roads
     By which our northern wilds could then be crossed;
     And into most of these secluded vales
     Was no access for wain, heavy or light.
     So at his dwelling-place the priest arrived
     With store of household goods, in panniers slung
     On sturdy horses graced with jingling bells,
     And on the back of more ignoble beast,
     That, with like burthen of effects most prized
     Or easiest carried, closed the motley train.
     Young was I then, a schoolboy of eight years:
     But still methinks I see them as they passed
     In order, drawing toward their wished-for home.
     Rocked by the motion of a trusty ass
     Two ruddy children hung, a well-poised freight,
     Each in his basket nodding drowsily,
     Their bonnets, I remember, wreathed with flowers,
     Which told it was the pleasant month of June;
     And close behind the comely matron rode,
     A woman of soft speech and gracious smile,
     And with a lady's mien.--From far they came,
     Even from Northumbrian hills: yet theirs had been
     A merry journey, rich in pastime, cheered
     By music, pranks, and laughter-stirring jest;
     And freak put on, and arch word dropped--to swell
     That cloud of fancy and uncouth surmise
     Which gathered round the slowly moving train.
     'Whence do they come? and with what errand charged?
     Belong they to the fortune-telling tribe
     Who pitch their tents under the greenwood tree?
     Or Strollers are they, furnished to enact
     Fair Rosamond and the Children of the Wood?
     When the next village hears the show announced
     By blast of trumpet?' Plenteous was the growth
     Of such conjectures--overheard, or seen
     On many a staring countenance portrayed
     Of boor or burgher, as they marched along.
     And more than once their steadiness of face
     Was put to proof, and exercise supplied
     To their inventive humour, by stern looks,
     And questions in authoritative tone,
     By some staid guardian of the public peace,
     Checking the sober horse on which he rode,
     In his suspicious wisdom; oftener still
     By notice indirect or blunt demand
     From traveller halting in his own despite,
     A simple curiosity to ease:
     Of which adventures, that beguiled and cheered
     Their grave migration, the good pair would tell
     With undiminished glee in hoary age."

Meantime the lady of the house embellished it with feminine skill; and
the homely pastor--for such he had now become--not having any great
weight of spiritual duties, busied himself in rural labours and rural
sports. But was his mind, though bending submissively to his lot,
changed in conformity to his task? No:

                               "For he still
     Retained a flashing eye, a burning palm,
     A stirring foot, a head which beat at nights
     Upon its pillow with a thousand schemes.
     Few likings had he dropped, few pleasures lost;
     Generous and charitable, prompt to serve;
     And still his harsher passions kept their hold--
     Anger and indignation. Still he loved
     The sound of titled names, and talked in glee
     Of long past banquetings with high-born friends:
     Then, from those lulling fits of vain delight
     Uproused by recollected injury, railed
     At their false ways disdainfully,--and oft
     In bitterness, and with a threatening eye
     Of fire, incensed beneath its hoary brow.
     Those transports, with staid looks of pure good-will,
     And with soft smile his consort would reprove.
     She, far behind him in the race of years,
     Yet keeping her first mildness, was advanced
     Far nearer, in the habit of her soul,
     To that still region whither all are bound."

Such was the tenor of their lives; such the separate character of
their manners and dispositions; and, with unusual quietness of course,
both were sailing placidly to their final haven. Death had not visited
their happy mansion through a space of forty years--"sparing both old
and young in that abode." But calms so deep are ominous--immunities
so profound are terrific. Suddenly the signal was given, and all lay
desolate.

                       "Not twice had fallen
     On those high peaks the first autumnal snow,
     Before the greedy visiting was closed,
     And the long-privileged house left empty; swept
     As by a plague. Yet no rapacious plague
     Had been among them; all was gentle death,
     One after one with intervals of peace."

The aged pastor's wife, his son, one of his daughters, and "a little
smiling grandson," all had gone within a brief series of days. These
composed the entire household in Grasmere (the others having dispersed
or married away); and all were gone but himself, by very many years the
oldest of the whole: he still survived. And the whole valley, nay, all
the valleys round about, speculated with a tender interest upon what
course the desolate old man would take for his support.

     "All gone, all vanished! he, deprived and bare,
     How will he face the remnant of his life?
     What will become of him? we said, and mused
     In sad conjectures.--Shall we meet him now,
     Haunting with rod and line the craggy brooks?
     Or shall we overhear him, as we pass,
     Striving to entertain the lonely hours
     With music? (for he had not ceased to touch
     The harp or viol, which himself had framed
     For their sweet purposes, with perfect skill).
     What titles will he keep? Will he remain
     Musician, gardener, builder, mechanist,
     A planter, and a rearer from the seed?"

Yes; he persevered in all his pursuits; intermitted none of them;
weathered a winter in solitude; once more beheld the glories of a
spring, and the resurrection of the flowers upon the graves of his
beloved; held out even through the depths of summer into the cheerful
season of haymaking (a season much later in Westmoreland than in the
south); took his rank, as heretofore, amongst the haymakers; sat
down at noon for a little rest to his aged limbs, and found even a
deeper rest than he was expecting; for, in a moment of time, without a
warning, without a struggle, and without a groan, he did indeed rest
from his labours for ever. He,

                       "With his cheerful throng
     Of open projects, and his inward hoard
     Of unsunned griefs, too many and too keen,
     Was overcome by unexpected sleep
     In one blest moment. Like a shadow thrown,
     Softly and lightly, from a passing cloud,
     Death fell upon him, while reclined he lay
     For noontide solace on the summer grass--
     The warm lap of his mother earth; and so,
     Their lenient term of separation passed,
     That family,
     By yet a higher privilege, once more
     Were gathered to each other."

Two surviving members of the family, a son and a daughter, I knew
intimately. Both have been long dead; but the children of the
daughter--grandsons, therefore, to the patriarch here recorded--are
living prosperously, and do honour to the interesting family they
represent.

The other family were, if less _generally_ interesting by their
characters or accomplishments, much more so by the circumstances
of their position; and that member of the family with whom accident
and neighbourhood had brought me especially connected was, in her
intellectual capacity, probably superior to most of those whom I have
had occasion to record. Had no misfortunes settled upon her life
prematurely, and with the benefit of a little judicious guidance to her
studies, I am of opinion that she would have been a most distinguished
person. Her situation, when I came to know her, was one of touching
interest. I will state the circumstances:--She was the sole and
illegitimate daughter of a country gentleman, and was a favourite with
her father, as she well deserved to be, in a degree so excessive--so
nearly idolatrous--that I never heard illustrations of it mentioned
but that secretly I trembled for the endurance of so perilous a love
under the common accidents of life, and still more under the unusual
difficulties and snares of her peculiar situation. Her father was,
by birth, breeding, and property, a Leicestershire farmer; not,
perhaps, what you would strictly call a gentleman, for he affected no
refinements of manner, but rather courted the exterior of a bluff,
careless yeoman. Still he was of that class whom all people, even
then, on his letters, addressed as _esquire_: he had an ample income,
and was surrounded with all the luxuries of modern life. In early
life--and that was the sole palliation of his guilt--(and yet, again,
in another view, aggravated it)--he had allowed himself to violate his
own conscience in a way which, from the hour of his error, never ceased
to pursue him with remorse, and which was, in fact, its own avenger.
Mr. K---- was a favourite specimen of English yeomanly beauty: a fine
athletic figure; and with features handsome, well moulded, frank and
generous in their expression, and in a striking degree manly. In fact,
he might have sat for Robin Hood. It happened that a young lady of his
own neighbourhood, somewhere near Mount Soril I think, fell desperately
in love with him. Oh! blindness of the human heart! how deeply did
she come to rue the day when she first turned her thoughts to him! At
first, however, her case seemed a hopeless one; for she herself was
remarkably plain, and Mr. K---- was profoundly in love with the very
handsome daughter of a neighbouring farmer. One advantage, however,
there was on the side of this plain girl: she was rich; and part of
her wealth, or of her expectations, lay in landed property that would
effect a very tempting _arrondissement_ of an estate belonging to Mr.
K----. Through what course the affair travelled, I never heard more
particularly than that Mr. K---- was besieged and worried out of his
steady mind by the solicitations of aunts and other relations, who
had all adopted the cause of the heiress. But what finally availed
to extort a reluctant consent from him was the representation made
by the young lady's family, and backed by medical men, that she was
seriously in danger of dying unless Mr. K---- would make her his wife.
He was no coxcomb; but, when he heard all his own female relations
calling him a murderer, and taxing him with having, at times, given
some encouragement to the unhappy lovesick girl, in an evil hour he
agreed to give up his own sweetheart and marry her. He did so. But
no sooner was this fatal step taken than it was repented. His love
returned in bitter excess for the girl whom he had forsaken, and
with frantic remorse. This girl, at length, by the mere force of his
grief, he actually persuaded to live with him as his wife; and when,
in spite of all concealments, the fact began to transpire, and the
angry wife, in order to break off the connexion, obtained his consent
to their quitting Leicestershire altogether and transferring their
whole establishment to the Lakes, Mr. K---- evaded the whole object of
this manoeuvre by secretly contriving to bring her rival also into
Westmoreland. Her, however, he placed in another vale; and, for some
years, it is pretty certain that Mrs. K---- never suspected the fact.
Some said that it was her pride which would not allow her to seem
conscious of so great an affront to herself; others, better skilled in
deciphering the meaning of manners, steadfastly affirmed that she was
in happy ignorance of an arrangement known to all the country beside.

Years passed on; and the situation of the poor wife became more and
more gloomy. During those years, she brought her husband no children;
on the other hand, her hated rival _had_: Mr. K---- saw growing up
about his table two children, a son, and then a daughter, who, in
their childhood, must have been beautiful creatures; for the son, when
I knew him in after life, though bloated and disfigured a good deal
by intemperance, was still a very fine young man; more athletic even
than his father; and presenting his father's handsome English yeoman's
face, exalted by a Roman dignity in some of the features. The daughter
was of the same cast of person; tall, and Roman also in the style of
her face. In fact, the brother and the sister would have offered a
fine impersonation of Coriolanus and Valeria. This Roman bias of the
features a little affected the feminine loveliness of the daughter's
appearance. But still, as the impression was not very decided, she
would have been pronounced anywhere a very captivating young woman.
These were the two crowns of Mr. K----'s felicity, that for seventeen
or eighteen years made the very glory of his life. But Nemesis was on
his steps; and one of these very children she framed the scourge which
made the day of his death a happy deliverance, for which he had long
hungered and thirsted. But I anticipate.

About the time when I came to reside in Grasmere, some little affair of
local business one night drew Wordsworth up to Mr. K----'s house. It
was called, and with great propriety, from the multitude of holly trees
that still survived from ancient days, _The Hollens_; which pretty
local name Mrs. K----, in her general spirit of vulgar sentimentality,
had changed to _Holly Grove_. The place, spite of its slipshod novelish
name, which might have led one to expect a corresponding style of
tinsel finery, and a display of childish purposes, about its furniture
or its arrangements, was really simple and unpretending; whilst its
situation was, in itself, a sufficient ground of interest; for it stood
on a little terrace running like an artificial gallery or corridor
along the final, and all but perpendicular, descent of the mighty
Fairfield.[175] It seemed as if it must require iron bolts to pin
it to the rock which rose so high, and, apparently, so close behind.
Not until you reached the little esplanade upon which the modest
mansion stood, were you aware of a little area interposed between
the rear of the house and the rock, just sufficient for ordinary
domestic offices. The house was otherwise interesting to myself, from
recalling one in which I had passed part of my infancy. As in that, you
entered by a rustic hall, fitted up so as to make a beautiful little
breakfasting-room: the distribution of the passages was pretty nearly
the same; and there were other resemblances.

It was at Mr. Wordsworth's house that I first became acquainted with
Professor (then Mr.) Wilson, of Elleray. I have elsewhere described
the impression which he made upon me at my first acquaintance; and
it is sufficiently known, from other accounts of Mr. Wilson (as, for
example, that written by Mr. Lockhart in "Peter's Letters"), that
he divided his time and the utmost sincerity of his love between
literature and the stormiest pleasures of real life. Cock-fighting,
wrestling, pugilistic contests, boat-racing, horse-racing, all enjoyed
Mr. Wilson's patronage; all were occasionally honoured by his personal
participation. I mention this in no unfriendly spirit toward Professor
Wilson; on the contrary, these propensities grew out of his ardent
temperament and his constitutional endowments--his strength, speed,
and agility: and, being confined to the period of youth--for I am
speaking of a period removed by five-and-twenty years--can do him no
dishonour amongst the candid and the judicious. "_Non lusisse pudet,
sed non incidere ludum._" The truth was that Professor Wilson had in
him, at that period of life, something of the old English chivalric
feeling which our old ballad poetry agrees in ascribing to Robin Hood.
Several men of genius have expressed to me, at different times, the
delight they had in the traditional character of Robin Hood. He has no
resemblance to the old heroes of Continental romance in one important
feature: they are uniformly victorious: and this gives even a tone of
monotony to the Continental poems: for, let them involve their hero in
what dangers they may, the reader still feels them to be as illusory
as those which menace an enchanter--an Astolpho, for instance, who,
by one blast of his horn, can dissipate an army of opponents. But
Robin is frequently beaten: he never declines a challenge; sometimes
he courts one; and occasionally he learns a lesson from some proud
tinker or masterful beggar, the moral of which teaches him that there
are better men in the world than himself. What follows? Is the brave
man angry with his stout-hearted antagonist because he is no less
brave and a little stronger than himself? Not at all; he insists on
making him a present, on giving him a _dejeuner à la fourchette_, and
(in case he is disposed to take service in the forest) finally adopts
him into his band of archers. Much the same spirit governed, in his
earlier years, Professor Wilson. And, though a man of prudence cannot
altogether approve of his throwing himself into the convivial society
of gipsies, tinkers, potters,[177] strolling players, &c., nevertheless
it tells altogether in favour of Professor Wilson's generosity of
mind, that he was ever ready to forgo his advantages of station and
birth, and to throw himself fearlessly upon his own native powers, as
man opposed to man. Even at Oxford he fought an aspiring shoemaker
repeatedly--which is creditable to both sides; for the very _prestige_
of the gown is already overpowering to the artisan from the beginning,
and he is half beaten by terror at his own presumption. Elsewhere he
sought out, or, at least, did not avoid the most dreaded of the local
heroes; and fought his way through his "most verdant years," taking or
giving defiances to the right and the left in perfect carelessness, as
chance or occasion offered. No man could well show more generosity in
these struggles, nor more magnanimity in reporting their issue, which
naturally went many times against him. But Mr. Wilson neither sought to
disguise the issue nor showed himself at all displeased with it: even
brutal ill-usage did not seem to have left any vindictive remembrance
of itself. These features of his character, however, and these
propensities, which naturally belonged merely to the transitional state
from boyhood to manhood, would have drawn little attention on their own
account, had they not been relieved and emphatically contrasted by his
passion for literature, and the fluent command which he soon showed
over a rich and voluptuous poetic diction. In everything Mr. Wilson
showed himself an Athenian. Athenians were all lovers of the cockpit;
and, howsoever shocking to the sensibilities of modern refinement, we
have no doubt that Plato was a frequent better at cock-fights; and
Socrates is known to have bred cocks himself. If he were any Athenian,
however, in particular, it was Alcibiades; for he had his marvellous
versatility; and to the Windermere neighbourhood, in which he had
settled, this versatility came recommended by something of the very
same position in society--the same wealth, the same social temper,
the same jovial hospitality. No person was better fitted to win or to
maintain a high place in social esteem; for he could adapt himself
to all companies; and the wish to conciliate and to win his way by
flattering the self-love of others was so predominant over all personal
self-love and vanity

     "That _he_ did in the general bosom reign
     Of young and old."

Mr. Wilson and most of his family I had already known for six years.
We had projected journeys together through Spain and Greece, all of
which had been nipped in the bud by Napoleon's furious and barbarous
mode of making war. It was no joke, as it had been in past times,
for an Englishman to be found wandering in continental regions;
the pretence that he was, or might be, a spy--a charge so easy to
make, so impossible to throw off--at once sufficed for the hanging
of the unhappy traveller. In one of his Spanish bulletins, Napoleon
even boasted[178] of having hanged sixteen Englishmen, "merchants
or others of that nation," whom he taxed with no suspicion even of
being suspected, beyond the simple fact of being detected in the
act of breathing Spanish air. These atrocities had interrupted our
continental schemes; and we were thus led the more to roam amongst
home scenes. How it happened I know not--for we had wandered together
often in England--but, by some accident, it was not until 1814 that we
visited Edinburgh together. Then it was that I first saw Scotland.

I remember a singular incident which befell us on the road.
Breakfasting together, before starting, at Mr. Wilson's place of
Elleray, we had roamed, through a long and delightful day, by way
of Ulleswater, &c. Reaching Penrith at night, we slept there; and
in the morning, as we were sunning ourselves in the street, we saw,
seated in an arm-chair, and dedicating himself to the self-same task
of _apricating_ his jolly personage, a rosy, jovial, portly man,
having something of the air of a Quaker. Good nature was clearly his
predominating quality; and, as that happened to be our foible also,
we soon fell into talk; and from that into reciprocations of good
will; and from those into a direct proposal, on our new friend's part,
that we should set out upon our travels together. How--whither--to
what end or object--seemed as little to enter into his speculations
as the cost of realizing them. Rare it is, in this business world
of ours, to find any man in so absolute a state of indifference and
neutrality that for him all quarters of the globe, and all points of
the compass, are self-balanced by philosophic equilibrium of choice.
There seemed to us something amusing and yet monstrous in such a
man; and, perhaps, had we been in the same condition of exquisite
indetermination, to this hour we might all have been staying together
at Penrith. We, however, were previously bound to Edinburgh; and, as
soon as this was explained to him, that way he proposed to accompany
us. We took a chaise, therefore, jointly, to Carlisle; and, during
the whole eighteen miles, he astonished us by the wildest and most
frantic displays of erudition, much of it levelled at Sir Isaac Newton.
Much philosophical learning also he exhibited; but the grotesque
accompaniment of the whole was that, after every bravura, he fell back
into his corner in fits of laughter at himself. We began to find out
the unhappy solution of his indifference and purposeless condition;
he was a lunatic; and, afterwards, we had reason to suppose that he
was now a fugitive from his keepers. At Carlisle he became restless
and suspicious; and, finally, upon some real or imaginary business, he
turned aside to Whitehaven. We were not the objects of his jealousy;
for he parted with us reluctantly and anxiously. On our part, we felt
our pleasure overcast by sadness; for we had been much amused by his
conversation, and could not but respect the philological learning
which he had displayed. But one thing was whimsical enough:--Wilson
purposely said some startling things--startling in point of decorum,
or gay pleasantries _contra bonos mores_; at every sally of which he
looked as awfully shocked as though he himself had not been holding
the most licentious talk in another key, licentious as respected all
truth of history or of science. Another illustration, in fact, he
furnished of what I have so often heard Coleridge say--that lunatics,
in general, so far from being the brilliant persons they are thought,
and having a preternatural brightness of fancy, usually are the very
dullest and most uninspired of mortals. The sequel of our poor friend's
history--for the apparent goodness of his nature had interested us
both in his fortunes, and caused us to inquire after him through all
probable channels--was, that he was last seen by a Cambridge man of our
acquaintance, but under circumstances which confirmed our worst fears.
It was in a stage-coach; and, at first, the Cantab suspected nothing
amiss; but, some accident of conversation having started the topic of
La Place's _Mechanique Celeste_, off flew our jolly Penrith friend in
a tirade against Sir Isaac Newton; so that at once we recognised him,
as the Vicar of Wakefield his "cosmogony friend" in prison; but--and
that was melancholy to hear--this tirade was suddenly checked, in
the rudest manner, by a brutal fellow in one corner of the carriage,
who, as it now appeared, was attending him as a regular keeper, and,
according to the custom of such people, always laid an interdict upon
every ebullition of fancy or animated thought. He was a man whose mind
had got some wheel entangled, or some spring overloaded, but else was
a learned and able person; and he was to be silent at the bidding of a
low, brutal fellow, incapable of distinguishing between the gaieties of
fancy and the wandering of the intellect. Sad fate! and sad inversion
of the natural relations between the accomplished scholar and the rude
illiterate boor!

Of Edinburgh I thought to have spoken at length. But I pause, and
retreat from the subject, when I remember that so many of those whom
I loved and honoured at that time--some, too, among the gayest of the
gay--are now lying in their graves. Of Professor Wilson's sisters,
the youngest, at that time a child almost, and standing at the very
vestibule of womanhood, is alone living; she has had a romantic life;
has twice traversed, with no attendance but her servants, the gloomy
regions of the Caucasus, and once with a young child by her side. Her
husband, Mr. M'Neill, is now the English Envoy at the court of Teheran.
On the rest, one of whom I honoured and loved as a sister, the curtain
has fallen; and here, in the present mood of my spirits, I also feel
disposed to drop a curtain over my subsequent memoirs. Farewell,
hallowed recollections!

Thus, I have sketched the condition of the Lake District, as to society
of an intellectual order, at the time (viz. the winter of 1808-9)
when I became a personal resident in that district; and, indeed, from
this era, through a period of about twenty years in succession, I
may describe my domicile as being amongst the lakes and mountains of
Westmoreland. It is true, I often made excursions to London, Bath,
and its neighbourhood, or northwards to Edinburgh, and, perhaps, on
an average, passed one-fourth part of each year at a distance from
this district; but here only it was that henceforwards I had a house
and small establishment. The house, for a very long course of years,
was that same cottage in Grasmere, embowered in roses and jessamine,
which I have already described as a spot hallowed to the admirers
of Mr. Wordsworth by his seven years' occupation of its pretty
chambers and its rocky orchard: a little domain, which he has himself
apostrophized as the "lowest stair in that magnificent temple" forming
the north-eastern boundary of Grasmere. The little orchard is rightly
called "the lowest stair"; for within itself all is ascending ground;
hardly enough of flat area on which to pitch a pavilion, and even that
scanty surface an inclined plane; whilst the rest of the valley, into
which you step immediately from the garden gate, is (according to the
characteristic beauty of the northern English valleys, as first noticed
by Mr. Wordsworth himself) "flat as the floor of a temple."

In sketching the state of the literary society gathered or gathering
about the English lakes, at the time of my settling amongst them, I
have of course authorized the reader to suppose that I personally
mixed freely amongst the whole; else I should have had neither the
means for describing that society with truth, nor any motive for
attempting it. Meantime the direct object of my own residence at the
lakes was the society of Mr. Wordsworth. And it will be a natural
inference that, if I mingled on familiar or friendly terms with this
society, _a fortiori_ would Mr. Wordsworth do so, as belonging to
the lake district by birth, and as having been, in some instances, my
own introducer to members of this community. But it was not so; and
never was a grosser blunder committed than by Lord Byron when, in a
letter to Mr. Hogg (from which an extract is given in some volume of
Mr. Lockhart's "Life of Sir Walter Scott"), he speaks of Wordsworth,
Southey, &c., in connexion with Sir Walter, as all alike injured by
mixing only with little adoring coteries, which each severally was
supposed to have gathered about himself as a centre.[179] Now, had this
really been the case, I know not how the objects of such a partial
or exclusive admiration could have been injured by it in any sense
with which the public were concerned. A writer may--and of that there
are many instances--write the worse for meeting nobody of sympathy
with himself; no admiration sufficient to convince him that he has
written powerfully: that misfortune, when it occurs, may injure a
writer, or may cause him to cease cultivating his genius. But no man
was ever injured by the strong reflection of his own power in love and
admiration; not as a writer, I mean: though it is very true, from the
great variety of modes in which praise, or the indirect flattery of
silent homage, acts upon different minds, that some men may be injured
as social companions: vanity, and, still more, egotism--the habit
of making self the central point of reference in every treatment of
every subject--may certainly be cherished by the idolatry of a private
circle, continually ascending; but arrogance and gloomy anti-social
pride are qualities much more likely to be favoured by sympathy
withheld, and the unjust denial of a man's pretensions. This, however,
need not be discussed with any reference to Mr. Wordsworth; for he had
no such admiring circle: no applauding coterie ever gathered about
him.[180] Wordsworth was not a man to be openly flattered; his pride
repelled that kind of homage, or any homage that offered itself with
the air of conferring honour; and repelled it in a tone of loftiness
or arrogance that never failed to kindle the pride of the baffled
flatterer. Nothing in the way of applause could give Wordsworth any
pleasure, unless it were the spontaneous and half-unconscious utterance
of delight in some passage--the implicit applause of love, half
afraid to express itself; or else the deliberate praise of rational
examination, study, and comparison, applied to his writings: these
were the only modes of admiration which could recommend themselves
to Wordsworth. But, had it been otherwise, there was another mistake
in what Lord Byron said:--The neighbouring people, in every degree,
"gentle and simple," literary or half-educated, who had heard of
Wordsworth, agreed in despising him. Never had poet or prophet less
honour in his own country. Of the gentry, very few knew anything about
Wordsworth. Grasmere was a vale little visited at that time, except for
an hour's admiration. The case is now [1840] altered; and partly by a
new road, which, having pierced the valley by a line carried along
the water's edge, at a most preposterous cost, and with a large arrear
of debt for the next generation, saves the labour of surmounting a
laborious hill. The case is now altered no less for the intellect of
the age; and Rydal Mount is now one of the most honoured abodes in
the island. But, at that time, Grasmere did not differ more from the
Grasmere of to-day than Wordsworth from the Wordsworth of 1809-20. I
repeat that he was little known, even as a resident in the country;
and, as a poet, strange it would have been had the little town of
Ambleside undertaken to judge for itself, and against a tribunal which
had for a time subdued the very temper of the age. Lord Byron might
have been sure that nowhere would the contempt for Mr. Wordsworth be
rifer than exactly amongst those who had a local reason for curiosity
about the man, and who, of course, adopting the tone of the presiding
journals, adopted them with a personality of feeling unknown elsewhere.

Except, therefore, with the Lloyds, or occasionally with Thomas
Wilkinson the Quaker, or very rarely with Southey, Wordsworth had no
intercourse at all beyond the limits of Grasmere: and in that valley I
was myself, for some years, his sole visiting friend; as, on the other
hand, my sole visitors as regarded that vale, were himself and his
family.

Among that family, and standing fourth in the series of his children,
was a little girl, whose life, short as it was, and whose death,
obscure and little heard of as it was amongst all the rest of the
world, connected themselves with the records of my own life by ties of
passion so profound, by a grief so frantic, and so memorable through
the injurious effects which it produced of a physical kind, that,
had I left untouched every other chapter of my own experience, I
should certainly have left behind some memorandum of this, as having
a permanent interest in the psychological history of human nature.
Luckily the facts are not without a parallel, and in well authenticated
medical books; else I should have scrupled (as what man does _not_
scruple who values, above all things, the reputation for veracity?) to
throw the whole stress of credibility on my own unattached narration.
But all experienced physicians know well that cases similar to mine,
though not common, occur at intervals in every large community.

When I first settled in Grasmere, Catherine Wordsworth was in her
infancy, but, even at that age, noticed me more than any other person,
excepting, of course, her mother. She had for an attendant a young
girl, perhaps thirteen years old--Sarah, one of the orphan children
left by the unfortunate couple, George and Sarah Green, whose tragical
end in a snow-storm I have already narrated.[181] This Sarah Green was
as far removed in character as could be imagined from that elder sister
who had won so much admiration in her childish days, by her premature
display of energy and household virtues. She was lazy, luxurious,
and sensual: one, in fact, of those nurses who, in their anxiety to
gossip about young men, leave their infant or youthful charges to
the protection of chance. It was, however, not in her out-of-door
ramblings, but at home, that the accident occurred which determined
the fortunes of little Catherine. Mr. Coleridge was at that time a
visitor to the Wordsworths at Allan Bank, that house in Grasmere to
which Wordsworth had removed upon quitting his cottage. One day about
noon, when, perhaps, he was coming down to breakfast, Mr. Coleridge
passed Sarah Green, playing after her indolent fashion with the child;
and between them lay a number of carrots. He warned the girl that raw
carrots were an indigestible substance for the stomach of an infant.
This warning was neglected: little Catherine ate--it was never known
how many; and, in a short time, was seized with strong convulsions.
I saw her in this state about two P.M. No medical aid was to be had
nearer than Ambleside; about six miles distant. However, all proper
measures were taken; and, by sunset, she had so far recovered as to
be pronounced out of danger. Her left side, however, left arm, and
left leg, from that time forward, were in a disabled state: not what
could be called paralyzed, but suffering a sort of atony or imperfect
distribution of vital power.

Catherine was not above three years old when she died; so that there
could not have been much room for the expansion of her understanding,
or the unfolding of her real character. But there was room enough in
her short life, and too much, for love the most frantic to settle
upon her. The whole vale of Grasmere is not large enough to allow of
any great distances between house and house; and, as it happened that
little Kate Wordsworth returned my love, she in a manner lived with
me at my solitary cottage; as often as I could entice her from home,
walked with me, slept with me, and was my sole companion. That I was
not singular in ascribing some witchery to the nature and manners of
this innocent child, you may gather from the following most beautiful
lines extracted from a sketch[182] towards her portraiture, drawn by
her father (with whom, however, she was noways a favourite):--

     "And, as a faggot sparkles on the hearth,
     Not less if unattended and alone
     Than when both young and old sit gathered round
     And take delight in its activity;
     Even so this happy creature of herself
     Was all sufficient: solitude to her
     Was blithe society, who filled the air
     With gladness and involuntary songs.
     Light were her sallies as the tripping fawn's,
     Forth-startled from the form where she lay couch'd;
     Unthought of, unexpected, as the stir
     Of the soft breeze ruffling the meadow-flowers,
     Or from before it chasing wantonly
     The many-coloured images impressed
     Upon the bosom of a placid lake."

It was this radiant spirit of joyousness, making solitude for her
blithe society, and filling from morning to night the air "with
gladness and involuntary songs," this it was which so fascinated my
heart that I became blindly, doatingly, in a servile degree, devoted
to this one affection. In the spring of 1812, I went up to London; and,
early in June, by a letter from Miss Wordsworth, her aunt, I learned
the terrific news (for such to me it was) that she had died suddenly.
She had gone to bed in good health about sunset on June 4th; was found
speechless a little before midnight; and died in the early dawn, just
as the first gleams of morning began to appear above Seat Sandel and
Fairfield, the mightiest of the Grasmere barriers, about an hour,
perhaps, before sunrise.

Never, perhaps, from the foundations of those mighty hills, was there
so fierce a convulsion of grief as mastered my faculties on receiving
that heart-shattering news. Over and above my excess of love for her,
I had always viewed her as an impersonation of the dawn and the spirit
of infancy; and this abstraction seated in her person, together with
the visionary sort of connexion which, even in her parting hours, she
assumed with the summer sun, by timing her immersion into the cloud
of death with the rising and setting of that fountain of life,--these
combined impressions recoiled so violently into a contrast or polar
antithesis to the image of death that each exalted and brightened the
other. I returned hastily to Grasmere; stretched myself every night,
for more than two months running, upon her grave; in fact, often
passed the night upon her grave; not (as may readily be supposed) in
any parade of grief; on the contrary, in that quiet valley of simple
shepherds, I was secure enough from observation until morning light
began to return; but in mere intensity of sick, frantic yearning after
neighbourhood to the darling of my heart. Many readers will have seen
in Sir Walter Scott's "Demonology," and in Dr. Abercrombie's "Inquiries
concerning the Intellectual Powers," some remarkable illustrations of
the creative faculties awakened in the eye or other organs by peculiar
states of passion; and it is worthy of a place amongst cases of that
nature that, in many solitary fields, at a considerable elevation
above the level of the valleys,--fields which, in the local dialect,
are called "intacks,"--my eye was haunted at times, in broad noonday
(oftener, however, in the afternoon), with a facility, but at times
also with a necessity, for weaving, out of a few simple elements, a
perfect picture of little Kate in the attitude and onward motion of
walking. I resorted constantly to these "intacks," as places where I
was little liable to disturbance; and usually I saw her at the opposite
side of the field, which might sometimes be at a distance of a quarter
of a mile, generally not so much. Always almost she carried a basket
on her head; and usually the first hint upon which the figure arose
commenced in wild plants, such as tall ferns, or the purple flowers
of the foxglove; but, whatever might be the colours or the forms,
uniformly the same little full-formed figure arose, uniformly dressed
in the little blue bed-gown and black skirt of Westmoreland, and
uniformly with the air of advancing motion. Through part of June, July,
and part of August, in fact throughout the summer, this frenzy of grief
continued. It was reasonably to be expected that nature would avenge
such senseless self-surrender to passion; for, in fact, so far from
making an effort to resist it, I clung to it as a luxury (which, in
the midst of suffering, it really was in part). All at once, on a day
at the latter end of August, in one instant of time, I was seized with
some nervous sensation that, for a moment, caused sickness. A glass
of brandy removed the sickness; but I felt, to my horror, a sting as
it were, of some stationary torment left behind--a torment absolutely
indescribable, but under which I felt assured that life could not be
borne. It is useless and impossible to describe what followed: with
no apparent illness discoverable to any medical eye--looking, indeed,
better than usual for three months and upwards, I was under the
possession of some internal nervous malady, that made each respiration
which I drew an act of separate anguish. I travelled southwards
immediately to Liverpool, to Birmingham, to Bristol, to Bath, for
medical advice; and finally rested--in a gloomy state of despair,
rather because I saw no use in further change than that I looked for
any change in this place more than others--at Clifton, near Bristol.
Here it was, at length, in the course of November, that, in one hour,
my malady began to leave me: it was not quite so abrupt, however, in
its departure, as in its first development: a peculiar sensation arose
from the knee downwards, about midnight: it went forwards through a
space of about five hours, and then stopped, leaving me perfectly free
from every trace of the awful malady which had possessed me, but so
much debilitated as with difficulty to stand or walk. Going down soon
after this, to Ilfracombe, in Devonshire, where there were hot sea
baths, I found it easy enough to restore my shattered strength. But the
remarkable fact in this catastrophe of my illness is that all grief
for little Kate Wordsworth, nay, all remembrance of her, had, with my
malady, vanished from my mind. The traces of her innocent features
were utterly washed away from my heart: she might have been dead for a
thousand years, so entirely abolished was the last lingering image of
her face or figure. The little memorials of her which her mother had
given to me, as, in particular, a pair of her red morocco shoes, won
not a sigh from me as I looked at them: even her little grassy grave,
white with snow, when I returned to Grasmere in January, 1813, was
looked at almost with indifference; except, indeed, as now become a
memorial to me of that dire internal physical convulsion thence arising
by which I had been shaken and wrenched; and, in short, a case more
entirely realizing the old Pagan superstition of a nympholepsy in the
first place, and, secondly, of a Lethe or river of oblivion, and the
possibility, by one draught from this potent stream, of applying an
everlasting ablution to all the soils and stains of human anguish, I do
not suppose the psychological history of man affords.

From the Lakes, as I have mentioned before, I went annually
southwards--chiefly to Somersetshire or to London, and more rarely
to Edinburgh. In my Somersetshire visits, I never failed to see Mrs.
Hannah More. My own relative's house, in fact, standing within one
mile of Barley Wood,[185] I seldom suffered a week to pass without
calling to pay my respects. There was a stronger motive to this than
simply what arose from Mrs. H. More's company, or even from that of
her sisters (one or two of whom were more entertaining, because more
filled with animal spirits and less thoughtful, than Mrs. Hannah);
for it rarely happened that one called within the privileged calling
hours,--which, with these rural ladies, ranged between twelve and
four o'clock,--but one met some person interesting by rank, station,
political or literary eminence.

Here, accordingly, it was that, during one of my last visits to
Somersetshire, either in 1813 or 1814, I met Mrs. Siddons, whom I had
often seen upon the stage, but never before in private society.[186]
She had come into this part of the country chiefly, I should imagine,
with a view to the medical advice at the Bristol Hot Wells and Clifton;
for it happened that one of her daughters--a fine interesting young
woman--was suffering under pulmonary consumption--that scourge of the
British youth; of which malady, I believe, she ultimately died. From
the Hot Wells, Mrs. Siddons had been persuaded to honour with her
company a certain Dr. Wh----, whose splendid villa of Mendip Lodge
stood about two miles from Barley Wood.

This villa, by the way, was a show place, in which a vast deal of money
had been sunk upon two follies equally unproductive of pleasure to the
beholder and of anything approaching a pecuniary compensation to the
owner. The villa, with its embellishments, was supposed to have cost
at least sixty thousand pounds; of which one-half had been absorbed,
partly by a contest with the natural obstacles of the situation, and
partly by the frailest of all ornaments--vast china jars, vases, and
other "knicknackery" baubles, which held their very existence by so
frail a tenure as the carefulness of a housemaid, and which, at all
events, if they should survive the accidents of life, never are known
to reproduce to the possessor one-tenth part of what they have cost.
Out of doors there were terraces of a mile long, one rising above
another, and carried, by mere artifice of mechanic skill, along the
perpendicular face of a lofty rock. Had they, when finished, any
particular beauty? Not at all. Considered as a pleasure ground, they
formed a far less delightful landscape, and a far less alluring haunt
to rambling steps, than most of the uncostly shrubberies which were
seen below, in unpretending situations, and upon the ordinary level
of the vale. What a record of human imbecility! For all his pains
and his expense in forming this costly "folly," his reward was daily
anxiety, and one solitary _bon mot_ which he used to record of some
man who, on being asked by the Rev. Doctor what he thought of his
place, replied that "he thought the Devil had tempted him up to an
exceedingly high place." No part of the grounds, nor the house itself,
was at all the better because originally it had been, beyond measure,
difficult to form it: so difficult that, according to Dr. Johnson's
witty remark on another occasion, there was good reason for wishing
that it had been impossible. The owner, whom I knew, most certainly
never enjoyed a happy day in this costly creation; which, after all,
displayed but little taste, though a gorgeous array of finery. The
show part of the house was itself a monument to the barrenness of
invention in him who planned it; consisting, as it did, of one long
suite of rooms in a straight line, without variety, without obvious
parts, and therefore without symmetry or proportions. This long vista
was so managed that, by means of folding-doors, the whole could be seen
at a glance, whilst its extent was magnified by a vast mirror at the
further end. The Doctor was a querulous old man, enormously tall and
enormously bilious; so that he had a spectral appearance when pacing
through the false gaieties of his glittering villa. He was a man of
letters, and had known Dr. Johnson, whom he admired prodigiously; and
had himself been, in earlier days, the author of a poem now forgotten.
He belonged, at one period, to the coterie of Miss Seward, Dr. Darwin,
Day, Mr. Edgeworth, &c.; consequently he might have been an agreeable
companion, having so much anecdote at his command: but his extreme
biliousness made him irritable in a painful degree and impatient of
contradiction--impatient even of dissent in the most moderate shape.
The latter stage of his life is worth recording, as a melancholy
comment upon the blindness of human foresight, and in some degree also
as a lesson on the disappointments which follow any departure from high
principle, and the deception which seldom fails to lie in ambush for
the deceiver. I had one day taken the liberty to ask him why, and with
what ultimate purpose, he, who did not like trouble and anxiety, had
embarrassed himself with the planning and construction of a villa that
manifestly embittered his days? "That is, my young friend," replied the
doctor, "speaking plainly, you mean to express your wonder that I, so
old a man (for he was then not far from seventy), should spend my time
in creating a show-box. Well now, I will tell you: precisely because
I _am_ old. I am naturally of a gloomy turn; and it has always struck
me that we English, who are constitutionally haunted by melancholy,
are too apt to encourage it by the gloomy air of the mansions we
inhabit. Your fortunate age, my friend, can dispense with such aids:
ours requires continual influxes of pleasure through the senses, in
order to cheat the stealthy advances of old age, and to beguile us
of our sadness. Gaiety, the _riant_ style in everything, that is what
we old men need. And I, who do not love the pains of creating, love
the creation; and, in fact, require it as part of my artillery against
time." Such was the amount of his explanation: and now, in a few words,
for his subsequent history.

Finding himself involved in difficulties by the expenses of this villa,
going on concurrently with a large London establishment, he looked
out for a good marriage (being a widower) as the sole means within
his reach for clearing off his embarrassments without proportionable
curtailment of his expenses. It happened, unhappily for both parties,
that he fell in with a widow lady, who was cruising about the world
with precisely the same views, and in precisely the same difficulties.
Each (or the friends of each) held out a false flag, magnifying
their incomes respectively, and sinking the embarrassments. Mutually
deceived, they married: and one change immediately introduced at the
splendid villa was the occupation of an entire wing by a lunatic
brother of the lady's; the care of whom, with a large allowance, had
been committed to her by the Court of Chancery. This, of itself,
shed a gloom over the place which defeated the primary purpose of
the doctor (as explained by himself) in erecting it. Windows barred,
maniacal howls, gloomy attendants from a lunatic hospital ranging
about: these were sad disturbances to the doctor's rose-leaf system of
life. This, however, if it were a nuisance, brought along with it some
_solatium_, as the lawyers express it, in the shape of the Chancery
allowance. But next came the load of debts for which there was no
_solatium_, and which turned out to be the only sort of possession
with which the lady was well endowed. The disconsolate doctor--an old
man, and a clergyman of the Establishment--could not resort to such
redress as a layman might have adopted: he was obliged to give up all
his establishments; his gay villa was offered to Queen Caroline, who
would, perhaps, have bought it, but that _her_ final troubles in this
world were also besetting her about that very time. For the present,
therefore, the villa was shut up, and "left alone with its glory."
The reverend and aged proprietor, now ten times more bilious and more
querulous than ever, shipped himself off for France; and there, in one
of the southern provinces--so far, therefore, as climate was concerned,
realizing his vision of gaiety, but for all else the most melancholy
of exiles--sick of the world and of himself, hating to live, yet more
intensely hating to die, in a short time the unhappy old man breathed
his last, in a common lodging house, gloomy and vulgar, and in all
things the very antithesis to that splendid abode which he had planned
for the consolation of his melancholy, and for the gay beguilement of
old age.

At this gentleman's villa Mrs. Siddons had been paying a visit; for
the doctor was a worshipper, in a servile degree, of all things which
flourished in the sunshine of the world's applause. To have been the
idolized favourite of nations, to have been an honoured and even a
privileged[187] guest at Windsor, that was enough for him; and he did
his utmost to do the honours of his neighbourhood, not less to glorify
himself in the eye of the country, who was fortunate enough to have
such a guest, than to show his respect for the distinguished visitor.
Mrs. Siddons felt herself flattered by the worthy doctor's splendid
hospitalities; for that they were really splendid may be judged by
this fact, communicated to me by Hannah More, viz. that the Bishop of
London (Porteus), when on a visit to Barley Wood, being much pressed by
the doctor to visit him, had at length accepted a dinner invitation.
Mrs. Hannah More was, of course, included in the invitation, but had
found it impossible to attend, from ill health; and the next morning,
at breakfast, the bishop had assured her that, in all his London
experience, in that city of magnificent dinners beyond all other
cities of the earth, and amongst the princes of the land, he had never
witnessed an entertainment so perfect in its appointments.

Gratified as she was, however, by her host's homage, as expressed in
his splendid style of entertaining, Mrs. Siddons was evidently more
happy in her residence at Barley Wood. The style of conversation
pleased her. It was religious: but Mrs. Siddons was herself religious;
and at that moment, when waiting with anxiety upon a daughter whose
languor seemed but too ominous in her maternal eyes, she was more than
usually open to religious impressions, and predisposed to religious
topics. Certain I am, however, from what I then observed, that Mrs.
Siddons, in common with many women of rank who were on the list of
the Barley Wood visitors, did not apprehend, in their full sense and
severity, the peculiar principles of Hannah More. This lady, excellent
as she was, and incapable of practising any studied deceit, had,
however, an instinct of worldly wisdom, which taught her to refrain
from shocking ears polite with too harsh or too broad an exposure
of all which she believed. This, at least, if it were any duty of
hers, she considered, perhaps, as already fulfilled by her writings;
and, moreover, the very tone of good breeding which she had derived
from the good company she had kept made her feel the impropriety of
lecturing her visitors even when she must have thought them in error.
Mrs. Siddons obviously thought Hannah More a person who differed from
the world chiefly by applying a greater energy, and sincerity, and
zeal, to a system of religious truth equally known to all. Repentance,
for instance--all people hold that to be a duty; and Mrs. Hannah More
differed from them only by holding it to be a duty of all hours, a
duty for youth not less than for age. But how much would she have been
shocked to hear that Mrs. Hannah More held all repentance, however
indispensable, yet in itself, and though followed by the sincerest
efforts at reformation of life, to be utterly unavailing as any
operative part of the means by which man gains acceptance with God. To
rely upon repentance, or upon anything that man can do for himself,
that Mrs. Hannah More considered as the mortal taint, as the [Greek:
prôton pseudos], in the worldly theories of the Christian scheme; and I
have heard the two ladies--Mrs. More and Mrs. Siddons, I mean--talking
by the hour together, as completely at cross purposes as it is possible
to imagine. Everything in fact of what was special in the creed
adopted by Mrs. Hannah More, by Wilberforce, and many others known as
Evangelical Christians, is always capable, in lax conversation, of
being translated into a vague general sense, which completely obscures
the true limitations of the meaning.

Mrs. Hannah More, however, was too polished a woman to allow of
any sectarian movement being impressed upon the conversation;
consequently, she soon directed it to literature, upon which Mrs.
Siddons was very amusing, from her recollections of Dr. Johnson, whose
fine-turned compliment to herself (so much in the spirit of those
unique compliments addressed to eminent people by Louis XIV) had for
ever planted the Doctor's memory in her heart.[188] She spoke also of
Garrick and of Mrs. Garrick; but not, I think, with so much respect and
affection as Mrs. Hannah More, who had, in her youthful days, received
the most friendly attentions from both, though coming forward at that
time in no higher character than as the author of _Percy_, the most
insipid of tragedies.

Mrs. Siddons was prevailed on to read passages from both Shakspere
and Milton. The dramatic readings were delightful; in fact, they were
almost stage rehearsals, accompanied with appropriate gesticulation.
One was the great somnambulist scene in _Macbeth_, which was the _ne
plus ultra_ in the whole range of Mrs. Siddons's scenical exhibitions,
and can never be forgotten by any man who once had the happiness to
witness that immortal performance of the divine artist. Another,
given at the request of a Dutch lady residing in the neighbourhood of
Barley Wood, was the scene from _King John_ of the Lady Constance,
beginning--"Gone to be married! gone to swear a peace!" &c. The last,
and truly superb for the musical intonation of the cadences, was that
inimitable apology or pleading of Christian charity for Cardinal
Wolsey, addressed to his bitterest enemy, Queen Catherine. All these,
in different degrees and different ways, were exquisite. But the
readings from Milton were not to my taste. And, some weeks after, when,
at Mrs. Hannah More's request, I had read to her some of Lord Byron's
most popular works, I got her to acknowledge, in then speaking upon the
subject of reading, that perhaps the style of Mrs. Siddons's reading
had been too much determined to the dramatic cast of emphasis, and the
pointed expression of character and situation which must always belong
to a speaker bearing a part in a dialogue, to admit of her assuming the
tone of a rapt poetic inspiration.

Meantime, whatever she did--whether it were in display of her own
matchless talents, but always at the earnest request of the company
or of her hostess, or whether it were in gentle acquiescent attention
to the display made by others, or whether it were as one member of a
general party taking her part occasionally for the amusement of the
rest and contributing to the general fund of social pleasure--nothing
could exceed the amiable, kind, and unassuming deportment of Mrs.
Siddons. She had retired from the stage,[190] and no longer regarded
herself as a public character.[191] But so much the stronger did she
seem to think the claims of her friends upon anything she could do for
their amusement.

Meantime, amongst the many pleasurable impressions which Mrs. Siddons's
presence never failed to make, there was one which was positively
painful and humiliating: it was the degradation which it inflicted
upon other women. One day there was a large dinner party at Barley
Wood: Mrs. Siddons was present; and I remarked to a gentleman who sat
next to me--a remark which he heartily confirmed--that, upon rising
to let the ladies leave us, Mrs. Siddons, by the mere necessity of
her regal deportment, dwarfed the whole party, and made them look
ridiculous; though Mrs. H. More, and others of the ladies present,
were otherwise really women of very pleasing appearance. One final
remark is forced upon me by my recollections of Mrs. Jordan, and of
her most unhappy end: it is this; and strange enough it seems:--that
the child of laughter and comic mirth, whose laugh itself thrilled
the heart with pleasure, and who created gaiety of the noblest order
for one entire generation of her countrymen, died prematurely, and in
exile, and in affliction which really killed her by its own stings.
If ever woman died of a broken heart, of tenderness bereaved, and of
hope deferred, that woman was Mrs. Jordan.[192] On the other hand, this
sad votary of Melpomene, the queen of the tragic stage, died full of
years and honours, in the bosom of her admiring country, in the centre
of idolizing friends, and happy in all things except this, that some
of those whom she most loved on earth had gone before her. Strange
contrariety of lots for the two transcendent daughters of the comic and
tragic muses. For my own part, I shall always regard my recollections
of Mrs. Siddons as those in which chiefly I have an advantage over
the coming generation; nay, perhaps over all generations; for many
centuries may revolve without producing such another transcendent
creature.
